Italian Paintings
A Catalogue of the Collection of The Metropolitan Museum of Art
VENETIAN SCHOOL
Federico Zeri 
with the assistance of Elizabeth E. Gardner.




Antonello da Messina
Real name Antonello di Giovanni d'Antonio. Born in Messina, Sicily, about 1450; died 1479. Antonello worked mostly in his birthplace but his apprenticeship, according to Pietro Summonte (1524), was undertaken with Colantonio in Naples, where he must have examined pictures by Jan van Eyck and Rogier van der Weyden. His portrait heads show Rogier's inﬂuence, and also recall the paintings of Petrus Christus, and his use of geometrical forms may be due to his knowledge of the Work of Piero della Francesca or his followers. In 1456 Antonello was in Messina; he was in Venice in 1475 and 1476. Only fragments femain of the large altarpiece of the Madonna and Child with Saints that he painted there for the church of San Cassiano (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna). This altarpiece, with its composition of figures set in an architectural frame, was an inﬂuential prototype that was followed by late fifteenth-century painters such as Giovanni Bellini and Alvise Vivarini. Antonello's son, Jacobello, and his nephew, Antonella de Saliba, were deeply inﬂuenced by his work.



Portrait of a Young Man
14.40.645 (Plate 1)
This picture was long known as a self-portrait, but when Antonello was as young as this sitter appears to be, he had not yet achieved such an accomplished style.
A possible date is around 1470. The painting has been somewhat damaged by early overcleaning, but the most important parts are intact.
Oil on wood. H. 10 5/8, w. 8 1/8 in. (27 X 20.6 cm.).



Christ Crowned with Thorns
32.100.82 (Plate 2)
This picture is almost certainly the Ecce Homo that was in the collection of Giulio Alliam of Palermo in the seventeenth century. At that time the date 1470 was said to have been visible on the cartellino at the bottom, which is now almost illegible. This would make it the earliest of the known versions of this subject by Antonello. Three others, resembling each other in composition but different from this, are in the Museo Civico in Piacenza (dated 1472), the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna (dated 1474), and the National Gallery of the Palazzo Spinola in Genoa.
Signed (at lower center): ANTONELLUS MESS. N... ME PIN.. T.
Oil, perhaps over tempera, on wood. H. 16 3/4, w. 12 in. (42.5 x 30.5 cm.).



Antonello de Saliba
Known activity 1480-1535. Antonello de Saliba was a nephew of Antonello da Messina and, like him, worked for the most part in Sicily. He copied paintings by his famous uncle and studied with the latter's son, Jacobello. Some of his formative years must have been spent in Venice as his pictures show a close dependence on Giovanni Bellini and the painters of Bellini's school. The style of his older brother, Pietro de Saliba, is similar to his, and their paintings, though far less distinguished than those of Antonello da Messina, resemble them enough to have been sometimes mistaken for Antonello's work.



The Madonna Adoring the Child
30.95.249 (Plate 3)
The figure of the Madonna is taken directly from a painting by Giovanni Bellini now in a private collection in Switzerland (formerly in the Moll and Wittgenstein collections in Vienna; G. Gronau, Giovanni Bellini (Kl. der Kst.), 1930, p. III). The same model was used again by Antonella de Saliba in another panel, belonging to the Musée Jacquemart-André in Paris (no. 943), which is almost identical to ours except that a curtain interrupts the landscape background; a similar picture attributed to Pietro de Seliba is in 2 private collection (S. Bottari, Pittura del Quattrocento in Sicilia, 1953, pl. CXLV, fig. 172). The figure of the Child also follows the type painted by Giovanni Bellini during the last decade of the fifteenth century.
Tempera and oil on wood. H. 26 5/8, w. 19 1/2 in. (67.6 x 49.5 cm.).





Giovanni Bellini
Sometimes called Giarnbellino. Born about 1430; died 1516. Giovanni Bellini is supposed to have spent some of his formative years in Padua, working under his father, Jacopo Bellini, and his ascetic early style also shows the powerful inﬂuence of paintings by his brother-in-law Mantegna and of the sculptures by Donatello in Padua. The effect of these inﬂuences is seen in a number of his early paintings of the Madonna and Child and is even more evident in his Agony in the Garden in the National Gallery in London. He went to Venice some time before 1460, and there he gradually developed a new style, characterized by an increasingly lyrical expression of human feeling. His pictures began to show a new comprehension of space and color, due probably to the inﬂuence of Antonello da Messina and perhaps that of Piero della Francesca as well. By about the beginning of the 1480's Bellini had become the accepted leader of the Venetian school. He had a large workshop and a number of followers, who based their paintings on his designs. Among his pupils were two of unquestioned genius, Giorgione and Titian, and in his latest period Bellini shows to some degree the inﬂuence of Giotgione. In 1506, when Bellini was in his middle seventies, Dürer wrote of him from Venice, "He is very old but he is still the best painter of them all." Bellini was one of the greatest painters of the Italian Renaissance and indeed of all Christian art.





The Madonna and Child
08.183.1 (Plate 4)
The listening attitude of the Child in this picture is very much like that of the Child in a similar painting in the Accademia in Venice (no. 612), in which a choir of cherubim hovers overhead. Our picture was the model fox a number of workshop replicas: one was formerly in the Cook collection, Richmond, and another is recorded in the Harrach Gallery in Vienna. The style, particularly the color and the handling of the paint, as well as the rendering of the landscape, indicates a date close to 1490.
Signed (at lower center): IOANNES BELLINVS.
Oil on wood. H. 35, w. 28 in. (88.9 x 71.1 cm.).



The Madonna Adoring the Sleeping Child 
30.95.256 (Plate 5)
This painting is accepted by most scholars as one of the earliest surviving works by Giovanni Bellini, and it must have been painted at the beginning of the 1460's, or even before. The theme, the Madonna in prayer with the sleeping Child on the parapet before her, was often used by Antonio Vivarini and his circle. The placing of the Child on the marble and his deathlike stillness allude to the Pietà. The surface of this picture has suffered from loss of paint, the precious ultramarine blue of the Virgin's mantle, for instance, having been almost entirely removed. The landscape background, however, and the nobility and reserve of the Virgin make it one of the most significant of Bellini's works.
Tempera on wood. H. 28 1/2, w. 18 1/4 in. (72.4 x 46.3 cm.).



Giovanni Bellini & Workshop





The Madonna and Child with Saint
49.7.1 (Plate 6)
The saints are, left to right, Peter, Catherine of Alexandria, Lucy, and john the Baptist. This painting shows all the characteristics of Bellini's last period, and pentimenti around the heads of the two female saints indicate that the design is Bellini's own, but the execution is clearly only in part by him. Many areas, especially in the draperies of the saints, were carried out by assistants or pupils. None of the inferior details, however, are individual enough to be ascribed to any particular painter in Bellini's workshop, and it is not even clear whether one or more helpers were involved. The face of Saint John is similar to that of the same saint in the altarpiece of the Baptism of Chxist (1500-1502) in the church of Santa Corona in Vicenza, but the Giorgionesque quality of the sunset light and the blue mountains in the far background indicate a date later than that of the Baptism, toward 1520 or even slightly later. The figure of Saint Catherine also suggests a late date since a figure of the same type reappears, with some variations, in a few other late works from Bellini's workshop, for instance, in :1 painting in the Morgan Library in New York.
Signed (on cartellino at lower center): IOANNES BELLINVS.
Inscribed (on scroll held by Saint John the Baptist): ECCE AGNVS DEI.
Tempem and oil on wood. H. 38 x/4, w. 60 1/2 in. (97.2 X 153.7 cm.).



Workshop of Giovanni Bellini





The Madonna and Child
49.7.2 (Plate 8)
This picture is a good product of Giovanni Bellini's workshop, and was painted toward 1510. The execution is too stiff to be Bellini's and the handling of the paint does not show his typical treatment. The composition of the figures, however, is clearly a Bellinesque invention. The castle in the background, which is taken from one of the best works of Bel1ini's late period, the Madonna of the Meadow (National Gallery, London, no. 599), was also used by a number of his pupils and followers, appearing in paintings in the johnson collection in the Philadelphia Museum (no. 183), the National Gallery of Canada (no. 328), the collection of Lord Wemyss, and elsewhere. A weak copy after this picture, made only slightly later, is in the Ca' d'Oro, Venice. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Giovanni Bellini.
Tempera. and oil on wood. H. 13 3/8, w. 10 7/8 in. (34 x 27.7 cm.).



The Presentation in the Temple
68.192 (Plate 7)
This painting is derived from an original of Giovanni Bellini, which must have been executed around 1490, and is known today through a number of more or less contemporary copies and adaptations. There are at east twenty-nine versions of varying quality, some anonymous, and others attributed to specific masters; certain versions show a number of changes and in others only some details are borrowed from the entire composition (see Refs., F. Heinemann, 1962). Our painting is among the best examples, and the careful execution and faithful rendering of Bellini's types and forms suggest that it was painted in his workshop. The attribution to Girolamo da Santa Croce, however, is not supported by any technical or stylistic evidence, and must be rejected. The painting has suffered from ancient overcleaning.
Inscribed (on cartellino lower center): IOANNES BELLINVS.
Oil on wood. H. 29 I/4, w. 39 1/4 in. (74.5 x 99.4 Cm.).



Jacopo Bellini
Known activity 1424-1470; mentioned as dead in a document of 1471. Jacopo Bellini was the father of Gentile and Giovanni Bellini and the father-in-law of Andrea Mantegna. Nothing is known of his early training, but he has been tentatively identified with a Jacopo of Venice who was recorded in Florence in 1423 as a famulus (servant) of Gentile da Fabriano. In fact Jacopo signed himself as Gentile's pupil on some of his early works, such as an altarpiece painted in 1450 for a church in Padua and a large Crucifixion executed in 1436 for the cathedral of Verona. Both of these paintings are now lost. In 1440 Jacopo formed a partnership with Donato Bragadin, and a year later he was in Ferrara, where he triumphed over Pisanello in a contest to make a portrait of Lionello d'Este. An altarpiece, now lost, made in 1460 for the church of Saint Anthony in Padua, was signed with his name and those of his sons Gentile and Giovanni. Only a few paintings by Jacopo Bellini have survived, and of these only one is dated, the Madonna of 1448 in the Brera in Milan. His style is more fully seen in a large number of drawings, mainly preserved in two books in the Louvre and the British Museum, which show the broad range of his interests and suggest the probable themes of lost larger compositions. Jacopo was deeply inﬂuenced by Gentile da Fabriano and perhaps by Pisancllo. His style remained fundamentally Gothic, although his drawings and some of his paintings show his familiarity with works by such contemporary Florentine artists as Masolino and Andrea del Castagno, and by Florentine sculptors working in Venice.



The Madonna and Child
59.187 (Plate 9)
This panel is a typical work by Jacopo Bellini and shows a close afinity to his representations of the same subject in the Accaclemia in Venice, in the Uffizi, and in the Tadini Gallery in Lovere. Gentile da Fabriano's inﬂuence is apparent in the composition of the group, in the type of the blond Virgin, and in the soft modeling of the ﬂesh. In his way of rendering the Child's left leg Jacopo Bellini was apparently trying to resolve a problem of perspective with the empirical methods of contemporary Florentine artists. The gold ground and the archaic simplicity of the composition suggest an early dare, before 1448. The surface of this picture has suffered from loss of paint, particularly in the figure of the child.
Inscribed along the Virgin's dress: ... MARIA.
Tempera on wood; gold ground. Over-all size, h. 34 1/2, w. 2; in. (87.6 x 63.5 cm.); painted surface, h. 30 1/2, w. 21 3/4 in. (77.5 >< 55.2 cm.).



Bernardo Bellotto
Bernardo Bellotto. Born 1720; died 1780. Bellotto was the pupil in Venice of his more famous uncle, Antonio Canal, called Canaletto. Although Bellotto often signed his pictures with the same name, "Canaletto", only his early paintings could be easily confused with those of his master. When he was about twenty he began to travel extensively. He worked in Rome, and also in many of the cities of northern Italy. Afterward he traveled to Munich and about 1746 settled in Dresden, where he became court painter and spent most of his active years, painting handsome views of the city and also of Pirna and Vienna. In 1766 he went to St. Petersburg and in the following year to Warsaw, where he was court painter from 1770 until his death. Bellotto employed many of Canaletto's conventions, but late in life Canaletto was in turn inﬂuenced by his nephew. Bellotto's own style is characterized by a lower scale of values and greater contrasts of light and shadow. His landscapes show clear drawing and rendering of perspective and skillful efects of atmosphere and distance. 




Vaprio d'Adda
39.142 (Plate 10)
Vaprio d'Adda is a small town not far from Bergamo and Milan at the junction of the Adda and Brembo rivers. On the right of our painting is the small village of Canonica d'Adda and in the center is the Villa Melzi, where Leonardo da Vinci frequently went to visit his pupil Francesco Melzi. Bellotto made drawings after our picmrel and its pendant, now in the Crespi collection, Milan, labeling them copies of scenes he painted in 1744 for Count Simonetta in Milan. Thus the view of Vaprio d'Adda is a relatively early work, done shortly before the artist's Dresden period. A third picture of the Villa Melzi and Canonica d'Adda is missing, but is recorded in a drawing in the National Museum in Warsaw (inv. no. 126750; Rys. Pol. 2039); according to the artist's inscription it was in Dresden, but not in the royal collection.
Oil on canvas. H. 25 1/4, w. 39 1/4 in. (64.1 X 99.7 cm.).



Bonifazio Veronese
Real name Bonifazio de' Pitati; also called Bonifazio Veneziano. Born 1487; died 1553. Bonifazio was born in Verona but spent most of his life in Venice. His style is derived from that of Palma Vecchio, whom he assisted in the painting of the Last Supper in Santa Maria Mater Domini in Venice, and, like most of his contemporaries, he felt the inﬂuence of Giorgione. Later Bonifazio assimilated the mannerist forms imported into Venice through the painters of Parma and through Francesco Salviati, and some of his late works show a close similarity to the early style of Tintoretto. His major work was the series of pictures (now scattered) painted as decoration for the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi. At his best Bonifazio was a lively painter of narrative, but after 1540 his pictures, especially those with religious subjects, became repetitious and less interesting.



A Miracle of Saint Ambrose
32.100.78 (Plate 11)
This little scene may have decorated a chest, some other piece of furniture, or an overdoor, and was probably one of a series, now dispersed or lost. The painting shows the legend of the newborn Saint Ambrose (as related by Paulinus, Vita S. Ambrosii, 3, P.L. xiv, 28), on whose cradle a swarm of bees alighted without causing him any harm. The crowned personages in the center are Ambrose's father, who was Prefect of the Praetorium in Gaul, and his mother. This painting belongs to Bonifazio's mature period, and the elongated mannerist figures show a close affinity to Lambert Sustris and Andrea Schiavone. Formerly called by the Museum the Infant Moses in Pharaoh's Palace (Cat., 1940).
Oil on canvas, H. 10 1/2, w. 40 1/4 in (26.7 x 102.2 cm.).



Canaletto
Real name Antonio Canal, also spelled Canale. Born 1697; died 1768. After studying with his father, a designer for the theater, Canaletto went to Rome in 1719. There he must have met Pannini, who was at that time painting his imaginative views of Rorne and its ruins. On his return to Venice several years later, Canaletto became familiar with the landscapes and architectural pictures of Carlevarijs and Marco Ricci and began to paint views of the city, depicting with faithful accuracy its canals, palaces, and churches. Owing to the popularity of these scenes, Canaletto had many imitators, and even artists of such independent merit as Guardi, Marieschi, and Bernardo Bellotto, Canaletto's nephew, were strongly indebted to him. He was also an able engraver. His great patron Joseph Smith, the British consul in Venice, ordered many paintings from him and also a series of engravings. In 1746 Canaletto went to London and worked there for several years.



Venice: the Piazzetta
10.207 (Plate 12)
This view of the entrance to the Grand Canal shows Sansovino's Libreria Vecchia at the right and the lower part of the Piazzetta. Beyond lies the Fondaco della Farina and across the canal are the Dogana (Customs Office) and Santa Maria della Salute. Canaletto painted this same view several times, and the best example belongs to the Royal Collection at Windsor (M. Levy, Tbs Later Italian Pictures: in the Callecton of Her Majesty the Queen, 1964, pl. 139, no. 383). Other versions are recorded in many private collections. Views similar to ours are in the collection of the Duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth and elsewhere; the one most like ours is a canvas that in 1953 was in the London art market. Our view, a relatively early work, was probably painted during the second half of the 1720's. A drawing for this composition was in the possession of Valentino Bernardi of Bergamo in 1913. 
Oil on canvas. H. 51 1/2, w. 51 1/4 in (130.7 X 130.1 cm.).



Venice: Santa Maria della Salute
59.38 (Plate 13)
This painting shows the entrance of the Grand Canal in Venice, looking east, with the domed church of Santa Maria della Salute on the right. Beyond, in the middle distance, is the Dogana. At the left, across the canal, are the Zecca (Mint) and the Sansovino Library, one of the pillars of the Piazzetta, the Ducal Palace, the Prison, and the Riva degli Schiavoni. This is one of the most familiar views in Venice, very popular with foreign visitors, and Canaletto painted it a number of times. The best-known version is the one in the Royal Collection in Windsor Castle (M. Levey, The Later Italian Pictures in ths Collection of Her Majesty the Queen, 1964, pl. 175, no. 407), painted in 1744. Of the numerous others (see Refs., W.G. Constable, 1962), one formerly in the London art market had a pendant showing the Riva degli Schiavoni (see Connoisseur, CIII, 1939, p. ix, no. 5). Our picture also probably had such a pendant, or one showing the entrance to the Grand Canal looking west. The style of the painting suggests a date about 1740, in Canalett0's middle period.
Oil on canvas, H. 18 3/4, W. 31 1/4 in. (47.6 X 79.3 cm.).



Vittore Carpaccio
Vittore Carpaccio, surname variously spelled. Born about 1455; died between 1523 and 1526. Carpaccio was apparently a follower of Gentile Bellini, and Gentile's inﬂuence is particularly marked in the great historical and legendary scenes that he painted for the Scuola di San Giorgio degli Schiavoni, the Scuola degli Albanesi, and the Scuola di Sant'Orsola. This last cycle, considered his finest work, is now in the Accademia in Venice. His style shows a definite relationship to Lazzaro Bastiani and Marco Basaiti, and he was also inﬂuenced by Giovanni Bellini, and, to some degree, by Giorgione. Carpaccio's glowing and transparent color, his neat definition of forms, and his love for minute detail make him one of the most significant representatives of the naturalistic trend of the Italian Renaissance.




The Meditatian on the Passion
11.118 (Plate 14)
The key to the interpretation of this scene of the dead Christ attended by job (right) and Saint Jerome, with his lion, is provided by the distorted Hebrew characters on the stone block on which Job is sitting. In these, scholars have deeiphered the phrase "that my Redeemer liveth" and the number "19", referring to the nineteenth chapter of the Book of  ]ob, in which those words appear. Through Saint Jerome's interlinear commentary on the Book of Job, the sufferings of this Old Testament character came to be accepted as prefiguring the Passion of Christ (see Refs., F. Hartt, 1940). At the left a dry tree grows out of crags in a barren wilderness, and a panther is bringing down a stag (perhaps a symbol of the human soul). At the right a green tree ﬂourishes in the luxuriant country outside a prosperous fortified town, and here a stag appears to be successfully eluding a leopard. The two sages, ]ob and Jerome, who by their experiences and writings announced the Resurrection and its meaning in human life, sit here together in meditation upon the Passion of Christ. The style of the picture suggests a date at the end of the fifteenth century. It shows, especially in the figure of Job, in the ruined architecture of Chtist's throne, and in the structure of the hill on the left, the obvious inﬂuence of the major painters of the late fifteenth-century school of Ferrara, particularly Tura and Roberti. Perhaps this indicates that the Meditation was painted in Ferrara and, like the Death of the Virgin by Carpaccio, about 1508. Although no documentation exists, it is highly probable that Carpaccio went to Ferrara to paint the Death of the Virgin, formerly in the church of Santa Maria del Vado and now in the local gallery. In the seventeenth century the Meditation on the Passion and the Entombment of Christ, also by Carpaccio, now in the Dahlem Museum, Berlin (no. 23 A), were together in Ferrara in the collection of Roberto Canonici, and both paintings bore the false signature of Mantegna. In 1945 the Museum discovered that the signature of Carpaccio lay beneath the Mantegna signature, which was then removed (see Refs., M. Pease, 1945). Signed (at lower right): vjctorjs carpattjj venettj opus; inscribed with phrases in distorted Hebrew letters (on throne of Christ): "with a cry," "Israel," and "crown"; (on stone block at right): "Israel," "that my Redeemer liveth," and "19".
Tempera on wood. H. 27 3/4, w. 34 1/8 in. (70.5 X 86.7 cm.).



Francesco Casanova
Born 1727; died 1802. Francesco (or François Joseph) Casanova was the brother of the famous Giacomo Casanova and is frequently mentioned in his brother's memoirs. Though born in London of Venetian parents, he was brought up in Venice and studied under Francesco Simonini; in 1742 he was in the workshop of Gianantonio Guardi. Casanova traveled widely through the capitals of northern Europe. After four years in Dresden, he Went to Paris in 1757 and stayed there almost twenty years. His landscapes and battle pictures earned him a high reputation in France, and his work was praised by Diderot. In 1785 he went to Vienna, where he spent his last years. During this time he painted for Catherine of Russia a cycle of scenes celebrating the victories of the Russians over the Turks. Casanova's style shows clear reminiscences of Marco Ricci and the Guardis, but in his later work there is a certain international tone and a taste for decorative elegance.



Cavalier and Shepherd
07.225.253 (Plate 15)
This picture shows, especially in the distant figures, a slight echo of the manner of Francesco Simonini, but the general treatment is obviously affected by Flemish and French paintings of the late seventeenth century. It seems to belong to the mature period of Casanova.
Oil on canvas. H. 25 5/8, w. 32 in. (65.1 X 81.3 cm.).



Vincenzo Catena
Real name Vincenzo di Biagio. Active by the end of the fifteenth century; died 1531. His early work was strongly inﬂuenced by Giovanni Bellini and Cima. The first documentary record of Catena is an inscription, dated 1506, on the back of a painting by Giorgione indicating that he was Giorgione's partner. Documents from the two following decades show that Catena was a friend of the historian Marcantonio Michiel, the poet and cardinal Pietro Bembo, and the painter Sebastiano del Piombo. Even though Catena was in partnership with Giorgione as early as 1506 his work continued to show the inﬂuence of Giovanni Bellini and Cima, and it was not until late in his career that his way of painting was affected by the revolutionary achievements of his great contemporaries Giorgione and Titian. Catena probably visited Rome, perhaps about 1515, and some of his works show the inﬂuence of Raphael.



Portrait of a Venetian Senatar
30.95.258 (Plate 16)
This portrait has been considered by some critics to be a likeness of Andrea Gritti (1454-1538), who became Doge in 1523, but this identification cannot be accepted. By the time Catena's technique had reached the stage seen here Gritti was a far older man than the subject of our painting; furthermore, a portrait that is surely of Gritti, painted by Catena about 1530 (National Gallery, London, no. 5751), and the portrait of Gritti by Titian in this Museum both show a very different man from the subject of this painting. The composition of this impressive portrait, at one time attributed to Gentile Bellini, demonstrates that Catena was inﬂuenced by the late works of Giovanni Bellini and the early works of Titian.
Oil on canvas. H. 27 1/4, w. 24 in. (69.2 X 60.9 cm.).



The Adoration of the Shepherds
69.123 (Plate 17)
In this large canvas the derivative character of Catena's style is apparent, and the various inﬂuences on his work can be identified with precision. As indicated by Robertson (see Refs), the main group recalls the Allendale Nativity by Giorgione, now in the National Gallery, Washington (Kress coll, K509). The dog is nearly identical to the animal in Albrecht Dürer's Saint Eustace engraving of about 1505, except that the image is reversed, while the kneeling shepherd with the basket of eggs nearby would seem to be adapted from Cima da Conegliano's Nativity in the church of Santa Maria del Carmine in Venice, a work usually dated between 1508 and 1510. The ﬂying angel near the upper left corner is very similar to those in Catena's Madonna and Child formerly in the collection of Richard Auspitzer, New York, and now in the Samuel S. Fleisher Art Memorial in Philadelphia; the figure of the Child is based on the same cartoon that the artist used in paintings in the Berlin Museum (no. 19) and in the Hermitage in Leningrad (no. 9). The architecture of the buildings in the background is characteristically Venetian, but the treatment of the thatched hut and the hilly landscape to the right is reminiscent of Dürer's engravings. The picture should be dated in the early 1520's, possibly around 1521-1523. The allegedly Giorgionesque character of the forms, which was noted by various authorities, was due exclusively to restoration of the surface, and has completely disappeared with the removal of old varnishes and repainting.
Oil on canvas. Over-all, h. 50 5/8, w. 83 1/2 in. (128.6 x 212.1 cm.); painted surface, h. 49 1/2, w. 81 3/4 in. (125.8 x 207.6 cm.).



Giovanni Battista Cima
Giovanni Battisa Cima; usually called Cima da Conegliano. Born about 1459; died 1517 or 1518. Cima, a native of Conegliano, probably studied painting with Alvise Vivarini in Venice. Although there is no record of his presence there until 1492, it appears that he visited Venice before that time since an altarpiece by him, dated 1489 (now in Vicenza), is obviously derived from Giovanni Bellini's Madonna of 1488 in the church of the Frari, Venice. Cima's paintings, with their clear colors, dignified figures, and poetic landscapes, follow the art of Giovanni Bellini in his middle period; in spite of the triumph of the new style of Giorgione and Titian, these works hold to the fifteenth-century tradition.



Three Saints: Roch, Anthony Abbot, and Lucy
07.149 (Plate 18)
This small altarpiece is one of the artist's latest works. The somewhat lower quality of certain passages seems to betray the participation of pupils and assistants. The surface of the painting has suffered slightly in the transfer from wood to canvas. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Girolamo di Bernardino da Udine.
Tempera and oil on canvas, transferred from wood. H. 50 1/2, w. 48 in. (128.2 x 121.9 cm.).



The Madonna and Child with Saint Francis and Saint Clare
41.190.11 (Plate 19)
In this minor but characteristic work Cima arranged some of his most typical motifs within a popular format first used in Venice by Giovanni Bellini. A similar group with slight variations was repeated by Cima many times. Examples are a panel in the Morgan Library in New York and one in the Accademia in Venice (no. 815, the so-called Madonna of the Orange Tree), in which, however, the figures are full length. The style is typical of Cima's late period, about 1510. The female saint was at one time identified as Catherine of Siena but is undoubtedly Saint Clare of Assisi since she wears the habit of a Franciscan nun. 
Inscribed (across parapet at the bottom): IOANNES BELLINVS FACIEBAT (this inscription was painted out between 1897 and 1916; a cleaning in the Museum after 1941 made it visible again).
Tempera on wood. H. 8, w. 10 1/2 in. (20.3 X 26.7 cm.).



Carlo Crivelli
Active by 1457; died about 1495. Carlo Crivelli was the son of a Venetian painter, Jacopo Crivelli, and the brother of Vittore Crivelli. In a document of 1457 he is mentioned as a master painter in Venice; another document gives evidence that he was in the town of Zara (Zadar) in Dalmatia in 1465. In 1468 he signed an altarpiece for Massa Fermana in the Marches, where he spent the rest of his life, living first in Fermo and then in Ascoli Piceno. His earliest dated extant work is from 1468 and his latest from 1493. Crivelli's painting shows the inﬂuence of such Venetians as Antonio Vivarini and the young Giovanni Bellini. An even greater impression was made on his style by the Paduan school of Francesco Squarcione, especially Giorgio Ciulinovitch, called Giorgio Schiavone, whom he may have met in Padua and again in Dalmatia. Crivelli's conception of form remained utterly Gothic. When he adapted Renaissance themes he transposed them into stylized and imaginative visions, the forms outlined by sharp, clear drawing and often emphasized by richly tooled gold grounds. He continued to use a number of traditional religious symbols and the many-paneled form of altarpiece known as the ancona. His archaic style, as well as his admirable craftsmanship, explains his great success in the provincial centers of the Marches, where he had a considerable inﬂuence.



Saint Dominic
05.41.1 (Plate 20)
This painting of Saint Dominic and the one of Saint George that follows originally belonged to a polyptych, the central panel of which was a Madonna and Child, signed and dated 1471 (collection of Jack Linsky, New York; foxmerly Erickson collection, New York). Two other panels by Crivelli, a Saint Nicholas of Bari (Cleveland Museum of Art, no. 52.111) and a Saint james Major (Brooklyn Museum, McDonald loan) were with our panels in the Fesch and Davenport Bromley collections, and accordingly must have belonged to the same polyptych, one of Crivelli's comparatively early works.
Tempera on wood; tooled gold ground. H. 38 1/4, w. 12 3/4 in. (97.2 X 32.4 cm.).



Saint George
05.41.2 (Plate 20)
See comment above under Saint Dominic.
Tempera on wood; tooled gold ground. H. 38, w. 13 1/4. in. (96.5 >< 33.7 cm.).



The Pietà
13.178 (Plate 21)
This painting, which is said to have come from Ascoli Piceno, clearly belonged to the upper tier of an ancona, the complex type of late Gothic altarpiece used by Crivelli almost to the end of his life. In 1476 he painted such a two-tiered altarpiece for the high altar of the church of San Domenico at Ascoli Piceno, part of which, now combined with a third tier of standing saints from another work in the same church, is in the National Gallery, London (no. 788), and is known as the Demidoff altarpiece (see F. Zeri, Arte antica e moderna, nos. 13/16, 1961, pp. 162 ff.). As our Pietà is very close in style to the lower-tier Demidoff panels, it was undoubtedly the central panel of the second tier of the altarpiece in its original form, placed above the Virgin and Child, with two panels of half-length saints on either side. Like the Demidoff panels, it shows in composition and dramatic tension a close link to the Paduan school and to the paintings of Giovanni Bellini. Furthermore, the embossed and gilded haloes in the Pietà are the same in type as those in the Demidoff panels. The only dissimilarity is that the tooled background in our panel has a diiferent design from that ornamenting the ground of the nine panels of the two lower tiers in London, a discrepancy of relatively minor importance.
Tempera on wood; tooled gold ground.
Over-all, h. 28 1/4, w. 25 3/8 in. (71.7 x 64.5 cm.); painted surface (arched top), h. 28, w. 25 1/8 in. (71.1 x 63.8 cm.).



The Madonna and Child
49.7.5 (Plate 22)
This small panel is one of Crivelli's most important and characteristic works. It is executed with the delicacy of a miniature, and the perfect condition of its surface reveals its exquisite quality. The sharp, faultless design, the brilliant colors, and the type of the Madonna and Child suggest a date in the artist's middle period, probably at the beginning of the 1480's. The figures are realistically presented in relation to the landscape background, but the objects near them, the fruit, the ﬂy on the marble parapet, and the strings of the curtain, are outsize, and create the atmosphere of an imaginary world. The haloes, disks of gold set with pearls and cabochon jewels, and the richly ornamented costume give a delimte and precious effect. The picture contains a number of symbols of sin and redemption. The apples in the garland probably allude to original sin, and the cucumber to the story of Jonah (IV:6), which has been linked with the Resurrection since early times. The large ﬂy, representing evil or the devil, is opposed by the goldfinch, a symbol of the Passion, which the infant Christ clutches. This picture can probably be identified with the Madonna and Child recorded in 1790 in the collection of Pier Giovanni Lenti at Ascoli Piceno, which was reported to have borne the same signature (see Refs., B. Orsini, 1790). Signed (at lower center): OPVS.KAROLI.CRIVELLI.VENETI.
Tempera and gold on Wood. Over-all size, h. 14 7/8, w. 10 in. (37.8 x 25.4 cm.); painted surface, h. 14 5/8, w. 9 1/4 in. (36.5 x 23.5 cm.).




Gasparo Diziani
Born 1689; died 1767. Gasparo Diziani was the pupil of Gregorio Lazzarini and was inﬂuenced by Sebastiano Ricci. He made many ceiling decorations in Venice; he also worked in Rome and Dresden and spent some time in Russia. 




Dawn (ceiling decoration) 
06.1335.1 (Plate 2.4) 
This decoration has been installed by the Museum in the room for which it was originally painted, a sumptuous bedroom from the Palazzo Sagredo in Venice. It is surrounded by a rich stucco decoration, without doubt the work of the artisans Abbondio Stazio and Carpoforo Mazzetti Tencalla, who were employed by Zaccaria Sagredo to redecomte the Palazzo. The allegorical figure of Dawn, surrounded by cupids, is shown xising in the center; at the right is the dark figure of Night pouring dew from a jug. The style of the painting shows the pronounced inﬂuence of Sebastiano Ricci.
Oil on canvas. H. 78, w. 94 1/z in. (198.1 X 240 cm.).



Michele Giambono
Real name Michele Giovanni Bono. Known activity 1420-1462. It is evident from Giambono's signed panels in the National Gallery in Rome and in the Accademia in Venice, as well as others that can be related to them, that he was a painter working in the international Gothic style. His works show the inﬂuence of his fellow Venetian jacobello del Fiore, the Umbrian painter Gentile da Fabriano, and possibly Pisanello. Giambono was not only a painter; he also decorated frames and wood scupture in gold and polychrorny and worked in mosaic, as in the cycle illustrating the life of the Virgin in the Mascoli chapel in San Marco, Venice, begun by him in 1444 and completed by other artists.



The Man of Sorrows
06.180 (Plate 23)
Behind the sarcophagus is a small figure of Saint Francis receiving the stigmata, which come directly from the wounds of Christ rather than from the usual ﬂying seraphic figure. The inﬂuence of Gentile da Fabriano is particularly pronounced in this panel, suggesting that the artist painted it early i.n his career. A similar panel in the Emu Capodilista collection in the Museo Civico in Padua (no. 6) was painted by Giambono at a later time and lacks the figure of Saint Francis.
Tempera on wood; embossed blood and crown of thorns, incised Wounds. Over-all size, h. 21 5/8, w. 15 1/4 in. (54.9 x 38.8 cm.); painted surface, h. 18 1/2, W. 12 1/4 in. (47 x 31.1 cm.).



Jacopo Guarana
Jacopo Guarana. Born 1720; died 1808. Guarana studied first under Sebastiano Ricci.
Later he became one of the principal followers of Giovanni Battista Tiepoio and assisted him in numerous decorations, including the ceiling in the Villa Pisani in Strà.
Among his best works are those in the Paiazzo Rezzonico in Venice and in San Vitale (1781) in Ravenna.



The Crowning with Thorns
71.30 (Plate 25)
This painting is a careful copy after the original by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo in the Kunsthalle in Hamburg (no. 644), a work that was repeated in a number of different versions by members of his school. The Museum's example is evidently by Jacopo Guarana, whose abbreviated signature appears on it. Another version of exactly the same size as ours was in the Douine collection (sale, Charpentier, Paris, April 11, 1946, no. 38, as Domenico Tiepolo), but it is uncertain whether it was by Guarana or some other minor follower of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. Signed (lower right, on slab): GVARA.F.
Oil on canvas. H. 30 5/8, w, 34 1/4 im
(77.7 x 87 cm.).





Francesco Guardi
Born 1712; died 1793. Guardi, born in Venice of a noble family from Trent, was first mined as a painter in the studio of his elder brother Gianantonio (1698-1760), with whom he collaborated, mostly on figure paintings. The extent of Francesco's contributions to their joint works has not yet been determined, and only in the pictures he painted after the death of Gianantonio does his individual personality as an artist emerge. In 1764 Gradenigo stated that Guardi was a pupil of Canaletto, and his style also shows the inﬂuence of his brother-in-law, Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, of Sebastiano Ricci, and possibly Pietro Longhi. Although Guardi painted imaginary landscapes with ruins, marines, figure pieces, and portraits, he is famous primarily for his views of Venice. The dating of his works is diﬂicult because there is little documentary evidence, and because of the many versions, both forgeries and originals, in which his compositions are known. Guardi was not highly regarded by his contemporaries, who considered him a mere follower of Canaletto, and he was not admitted to the Academy until he was seventy-two years old. From the little that is known about his life he seems to have been employed principally by Englishmen living in Venice, among them the picture-restore: Peter Edwards, for whom he painted four scenes recording the festivities held in honor of the visit of Pope Pius VI to Venice in 1782. Although Guardi's style closely follows the rococo formula, he has, in recent times, been considered an innovator, and a forerunner of nineteenth—century impressionism.



Venice: the Grand Canal above the Rialto
71.119 (Plate 26)
This is a view of the Grand Canal showing the bridge of the Rialto with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi and the Erberia (vegetable market) on the right. It is a pendant to the view of Santa Maria della Salute (see below). In composition it is closely connected with paintings by Canaletto, especially one in the Pillow collection in Montreal; other similar views by Canaletto are at Windsor Castle (engraved by Visentini, s. 1.7) and in the collection of the Duke of Richmond and Gordon. Guardi repeated this composition in a signed and much larger canvas now in the collection of the Earl of Iveagh, who also owns a companion to it, a view of the Grand Canal below the Rialto. The Iveagh version of our composition is very likely the one that, according to Gradenigo's diary, was exhibited by Guardi in the Piazza San Marco on April 24, 1764. A version of inferior quality was in the Greve collection (sale, Lepke's, Berlin, October 12-13, 1909). There is a large preparatory drawing connected with our painting that has been cut in two parts; one half is in the Musée Bonnet in Bayonne, the other in the Print Room in Berlin (see Refs., J. Byam Shaw, 1951, pls. XII, XIII). The style of our painting shows clearly the characteristics of Guardi's early period. Signed (lower left): Franco De' Guardi. Inscribed on reverse, upper left: Vuduta del Same di Rialto / in Venezia / del Guardi.
Oil on canvas. H. 21, w. 33 3/4 in. (53.3 X 85.7 cm.).



Venice: Santa Maria de/la Salute
71.120 (Plate 27)
The Seminario Patriarcale and part of the Dogana are to be seen at the left in this view of Santa Maria della Salute from across the Grand Canal. The picture, like its pendant, is an early work by Guardi. It should be noted that this is not the subject that he usually chose for companion pieces to his other versions of the Grand Canal above the Rialto (see comment above). Inscribed on reverse, upper left: dalla / Veduta Salute in Venezia / del F.°° Guardi.
Oil on canvas. H. 21, W. 33 3/4 in. (53.3 X 85.7 cm.).



Landscape
35.40.3 (Plate 28)
This small painting and the following one are of the type of imaginative landscape (capriccio) painted by Guardi during the later period of his life. The extensive number of similar works scattered in private collections and museums in Europe and America raises the question whether such small decorative paintings in which the style is somewhat mannered are indeed by Guardi or by pupils and assistants working with him. Our knowledge of Guarcli's workshop and of the apportionment of work there is very limited. However, the good quality and lively execution of these two landscapes, along with certain technical characteristics, seem to indicate Guardi's own hand. Formerly attributed by the Museum to the workshop of Guardi.
Oil on paper, mounted on canvas; oval. H. 6 1/4, w. 4 3/4 in. (15.8 x 12.1 crn.).



Landscape
35.40.4 (Plate 29)
See comment above under Landscape.
Oil on paper, mounted on canvas; oval. H. 6 1/4, w. 4. 3/4 in. (15.8 X 12.1 cm.).



Fantastic Landscape
41.80 (Plates 30, 31)
This picture and the two following, which are among Guardi's finest achievements in landscape painting, came from the castle of Colloredo, near Udine, in the region of Friuli, where they were installed in a salotto, or drawing room, added to the castle in the eighteenth century. The paintings do not, however, appear to have been designed for this room, and the circumstances surrounding the commission are unknown. The style suggests a date in the 1760's. Close examination of the pictures and a study of their composition show that changes were made in all three, either during their execution or slightly later. A section was added at the top of the Large painting, following more or less the original outline but making it considerably taller. This addition was almost certainly filled in by Guardi himself, although in places, especially along the right side, there is a certain roughness, suggesting the hand of a pupil or imitator. The smaller paintings show more extensive changes. Besides additions at the top, roughly preserving the original shape, both of them have added strips at the bottom, and Guardi introduced various figures and landscape elements to conceal the seams. A much smaller (16 x 32 1/4 in.) rectangular version by Guardi of the large landscape, which differs only in minor details from the Museum's picture, appeared in the James Speyer sale (Parke-Bernet, New York, April 10, 1942, no. 18), and subsequently in the Gustave Pierre Bader sale (Kende Gallery, New York, Dec. 11, 1942, no. 264). It had a companion piece, a fantastic landscape with an obelisk, which had no connection with our smaller landscapes.
Oil on canvas. H. 61 1/4, w. 107 1/2 in.
(155.5 X 273 cm.).



Fantastic Landscape
53.225.3 (Plate 32)
For comment see above.
Oil on canvas. H. 61 1/4, w. 74 1/2 in. (155.5 X 189.2 cm.).



Fantastic Landscape
53.225.4 (Plate 33)
For comment see above.
Oil on canvas. H. 6! 1/4, W. 74 1/2 in. (155.5 X 189.2 cm.).



Venice: Piazza San Marco
5o.145.21 (Plate 34)
This view of the Piazza San Marco is known in several versions, including one in the National Gallery, London, and one in the Accademia Carrara in Bergarno (see V. Moschini, Francesco Guardi, 1952, pls. 66, 73). The light, clear colors, unaltered by time, and the figure types combine to suggest a date in the 1750's. The composition is undoubtedly based on one or more prototypes by Canaletto. When our picture was in the Castletown collection it had a pendant, also signed, representing the Piazzetta; the present whereabouts of this picture is unknown. Signed (on painting held by man in lower right comer): Fran/ Guardi
Oil on canvas. H. 27 1/8, W. 33 3/4 in.
(68.9 x 85.7 cm.).



Venice from the Sea
65181.8 (Plate 35)
This panorama of Venice seen from the island of San Giorgio Maggiore shows the Molo, the Doge's palace, and the Riva degli Schiavoni. In the foreground are numerous boats and gondolas, while near the Doge's palace is the large galley in which criminals served their sentences, and which was also used during certain public ceremonies. This same view was repeated by Guardi in a number of other versions, differing only in size, and in certain details in the foreground. Among these the one at Waddesdon Manor, Hertfordshire, has a pendant showing the view from San Giorgio Maggiore toward the church of Santa Maria della Salute. It is larger than ours (112 X 167 in.) and is probably the largest view of Venice that Guardi ever painted. A similar view (47 1/2 x 79 in.) was formerly in the Musée des Beaux-Arts in Strasbourg but was destroyed during World War II. The foreground of the Strasbourg picture was very like the foreground of the Waddesdon view, although in a different perspective. A third version (25 x 37 5/8 in.) was formerly in the collection of Captain H. E. Rimington-Wilson in London and belongs now to the National Gallery of Ireland in Dublin. Another (33 x 50 1/2 in.) belonged to the George A. Hearn collection in New York until 1918; its present whereabouts is unknown. The Hearn version was very close to the Rimington-Wilson picture, and may have been a copy after it. Finally, a canvas in the Gardner Museum in Boston (20 1/4 X 33 in.) repeats the composition of the Museurn's view, omitting most of the gondolas in the foreground. The picture must be dated after 1755, when the third story was added to the clock tower in the Piazza San Marco. As noted by Watson (see Refs. below), our version and the version once in Strasbourg show the facade of the church of the Pieta completed only in the lowest section, as it remained until 1906, when the half-columns and the pcdirnent were added following the design of the architect Giorgio Massari. In the picture at Waddesdon Manor the fagade appears already complete, which would seem to indicate an earlier date. The Waddesdon version was probably undertaken before work on the fagade of the church of the Pietà was abandoned and, therefore, Guardi based his representation on drawings showing the fagade as it would look when finished; when construction was halted in the early 1760's, the incomplete facade became part of the Venetian landscape, and Guardi then chose to show it as it actually appeared. The picture must, therefore, date from the early 1760's, and is among Guardi's earliest view paintings. The high quality of even the minor details, particularly the boats and figures in the foreground, excludes the possibility of the intervention by assistants in the workshop.
Oil on canvas. H. 48, w. 60 in. (122 X 152.5 cm.).



Francesco Guardi (?)






Still Life
64.272.1 (Plate 36)
This painting and the following one represent bouquets of various kinds of ﬂowers in vases, urns, and baskets, with parrots, melons, and pomegranates, the compositions arranged on rocks against the sky. They were almost certainly part of a room decoration that must have included other canvases, now lost. The compositions are exuberantly arranged, and the truly rococo spirit is emphasized by the sparkling, vivid range of colors, and ﬂickering technique. Stylistically, these two pictures are among the best of a large group of still lifes of various shapes, all representing ﬂowers, fruits, and occasionally birds, that has come to light in recent times, and has been atttibuted to Francesco Guardi. The pictures in this group vary in quality but are consistent in style and technique. The weaker examples are apparently from the same workshop from which the best ones, including ours, came. In composition they are evidently inspired by the paintings of Margherita Caffi, who was perhaps born in Vicenza, and worked in Lombardy around the end of the seventeenth century. The rendering of certain plant forms is related to the work of Elisabetta Marchioni, a painter specializing in still lifes of ﬂowers; she was active in Rovigo, where some of her works are still preserved, and died around 1700. Some of the paintings in the group are signed Francesco Guardi, and certain characteristics of the handling of the brush, as well as the pigment, which includes minute grains of sand, are indeed close to the artist's sure works. Nevertheless, the attribution of these pictures to Francesco Guardi or his immediate circle remains extremely doubtful, and the problem cannot be resolved without a careful technical examination of the ones allegedly signed by him. Some of the unpublished paintings have recently been tested, and the signatures proved to be false. Moreover, it should be pointed out that dealers found and bought many of them during the 1950's and 1960's in Malta; the five huge pictures exhibited at the Hallsborough Gallery came from Malta, and less important examples, hitherto unnoticed but from the same hand or workshop, are still in private collections there, as well as in the store rooms in the National Museum in Valletta. The still life in the Angelo Rizzoli collection in Milan, bearing on the back of the canvas the inscription Guardi, is totally different in style and technique from other paintings in this group (exhibition catalogue, Mostra dei Guardi, Venice, 1965, p. 302, no. 159). It is most similar to two canvases in the sacristy of the parish church of Vigo d'Anaunia, which have been variously attributed to Francesco or Antonio Guardi, and were probably painted by the latter.
Oil on canvas. H. 72, W. 36 in. (182.8 X 91.4 cm.).



Still Life
64.272.2 (Plate 37)
See comment above under Still Life.
Oil on canvas. H. 72, W. 36 in. (182.8 X 91.4 cm.).



Jacometto Veneziano
Active about 1472; died before 1498. The little information that we have about this painter comes from Marcantonio Michiel (the so-called Anonimo Morelliano), a sixteenth-century chronicler, who lists several paintings by Jacornetto in Paduan and Venetian private collections. Two small miniature portraits now in The Robert Lehman Collection (until recently in the Liechtenstein collection) are undoubtedly the ones that Michiel referred to as his works. Using these as a basis for recognizing his style, Johannes Wilde and Martin Davies have attributed to Jacometto two more paintings, a portrait of a boy and one of a man in the National Gallery, London (nos. 2509 and 3121). A portrait of a woman, possibly a nun, in the collection of Lord Clark at Saltwood Castle, is by the same hand. jacometto must have been a direct follower of Antonello da Messina, if not his assistant during Antonello's Venetian period, to judge by the close relationship between their styles. Some of his works show an equally close relationship to the style of Giovanni Bellini, especially Bellini's paintings of about 1475. In technique, Jacometto's portraits mark the transition from the minute, almost Flemish, execution of Antonello's work to the broader, more idealized forms of Giovanni Bellini's painting. 




Portrait of a Young Man
49.7.3 (Plate 38)
This small painting, so like the works attributed with assurance to Jacornetto, is surely by him. In spite of the dominant inﬂuence of Antonello, this picture is strongly Venetian in feeling, recalling works painted by Giovanni Bellini in the mid-1470's, such as the Man of Sorrows with Angels in the Museum in  The fact that this portrait has been attributed at various times to Antonello, Giovanni Bellini, and Alvise Vivarini, shows the circle in Venetian painting to which Jacometto properly belongs and is proof of his significance and importance in the history of the Venetian school. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Giovanni Bellini. Tempera and oil on wood. H. 11, w. 8 1/4 in. (27.9 X 21 cm.).




Antonio Joli
Antonio Joli; also spelled Jolli or Gioli. Born about 1700; died 1777. Joli, who was active both as a stage designer and as a painter of views and contemporary events, cannot be classified as a member of a particular Italian school. He was born in Modena. and received his early training there, but by 1720 he was established in Rome, working in Pannini's shop and making copies of some of his master's most famous Roman views. In 1725 he was in Modena and in Perugia, where he executed the background of a large ceiling in which the figures had been painted by Sebastiano Ceccarini. Joli was in Venice preparing theatrical designs around 1740; four years later he visited London, where he painted views of the city. He may also have spent some time in Lombardy. Around 1750 he was Working in Madrid, but by 1755 he had returned to Venice, where he was admitted to the Academy as a painter of perspectives, landscapes, and ornaments. Joli's last years were spent in Naples. He settled there some time after 1761, worked for the Royal Theatre of San Carlo, and painted views of the region and events from the lives of the Neapolitan royalty of his time. His style, which reﬂects his theatrical activity, was based on that of Pannini and other contemporary artists, and his landscapes and historical pictures are more remarkable as documents than as works of art.



London: St. Paul's and Old London Bridge
1970.212.2 (Plate 39)
This is a view of the north bank of the Thames river, with the terrace and water gate of Somerset House, St. Paul's, the Monument, and Old London Bridge. In the distance are the spires of the city churches and, to the right of center, the characteristic silhouette of the Tower of London. This compositional device, in which an actual, if somewhat compressed, view of the city is seen through the lofty arcades of an imaginary building in the late Baroque style, is typical of joli's repertoire; he used it in various paintings of Rome, Venice, and other European capitals. Although the figures are clad in contem porary English costumes they show, along with the architecture and the view, the inﬂuence of Pannini, whom Joli rather superficially imitated throughout his prolific career. The picture should be dated about 1744, when Joli is known to have been active in London. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Samuel Scott.
Oil on canvas. H. 42, w. 47 in. (106.7 X 119.3 cm.).



Alessandro Longhi
Real name Alessandro Falca. Born 1733; died 1813. Alessandro Longhi was the son of Pietro Longhi, but unlike his father he devoted himself especially to portraiture and was sent to study under the portrait painter Giuseppe Nogari. The noble Venetian family of the Pisani became his patron, and he was chosen ofiicial portrait painter to the Venetian academy. He was also an engraver and in 1765 published a book on contemporary Venetian artists, which he illustrated with engraved likenesses.



Count Carla Aurelia Widmann
15.118 (Plate 44)
Count Carlo Widmann (1750-1799), the grandnephew of Pope Clement XIII, held the important office of Provveditore Generale da Mar. His official residence was Corfu, where he was in command in 1797, when the French overthrew Venice. Corfu appears in the background of the portrait. The style is that of Longhi's advanced period, and it was possibly painted in the mid 1790's.
Oil on canvas. H. 90 1/4, W. 53 3/4 in. (229.2 X 136.6 cm.).



Pietro Longhi
Real name Pietro Falca. Born 1702; died 1785. Pietro Longhi, trained by his father to be a goldsmith, began the study of painting as a pupil of Antonio Balestra in Venice and then went to Bologna, where he studied under Giuseppe Maria Crespi. Soon after his return to Venice (1732) he executed decorations in the Palazzo Sagredo (see p. 25), but it is not as a fresco painter that Longhi is remembered. Under Crespi's inﬂuence, he turned to painting episodes of daily life in small genre scenes. These charming and vivacious pictures, which became very popular in Venice, are his most typical work. In 1763 Longhi was appointed teacher and director of the school of art established by the Pisani family, and three years later he was made a member of the newly founded Venetian academy of painting. 




The Letter
14.32.1 (Plate 40)
This painting, with the three following, is said to have belonged to a series of twenty scenes painted by Longhi for the Gambardi family of Florence around 1746, the date appearing on the back of the Visit. Some of the series were bequeathed to Marchese Freschi of Padua, and it has been suggested that these are the ones in the National Gallery in London (nos. 1100 and 1101) and the Brera in Milan (nos. 780 and 781). This has not been verified. Others were left to Count Miari de Cumani, also of Padua, and these include our four and 2 group of six formerly in the collection of Lionello Perera in New York (see Sale Catalogue of the E. Volpi collection, American Art Galleries, New York, Dec. 17-19, 1917, nos. 441-446 and introductory notes). The Perera paintings were sold at Sotheby's (London, June 24, 1964, nos. 31-34; April 19, 1967, nos. 18 and 19). A replica of this painting is in the collection of Brinsley Ford, London. 
Oil on canvas. H. 24, W. 19 1/2 in. (60.9 x
49. 5 cm.).



The Visit
14.32.2 (Plate 41)
See comment above under the Letter.
Signed and dated (on back of canvas, now coveted by relining): Pietrus Longhi 1746.
Oil on canvas. H. 24, w. 19 I/2 in. (60.9 X 49.5 cm.).



The Temptation
17.190.12 (Plate 42)
The painting on the wall in the background is apparently a Venetian work of the seventeenth century, recalling the manner of Pietro Liberi. See also comment above under the Letter.
Oil on canvas. H. 24, W. 19 1/2 in. (60.9 X 49.5 cm.).



The Meeting
36.16 (Plate 43)
The two men at left and right wear the Venetian bautta, a mask attached to a short mantle of black silk. There is a rather crude copy in the Pushkin Museum in Moscow (N2698, 71 x 54 cm.); the additions to the interior decoration and the treatment of perspective indicate that it was painted in the late nineteenth century. See also comment above under the Letter. Oil on canvas. H. 24, w. 19 1/2. in. (60.9 x 49.5 cm.).



Lorenzo Lotto
Born about 1480; died 1556. Lotto was a pupil of Alvise Vivarini, and his early work also indicates that he was deeply impressed by the paintings of Giovanni Bellini. Later he developed a very personal style, in which it is possible to discern the inﬂuence of Giorgione, Titian, and Raphael, as well as Dürer and other painters of northern Europe. Little is known about the beginnings of Lotto's career, but there are signed works and many documents from his later years, including an expense book that he began to keep in 1538, listing in detail his commissions, with dates, and payments made and received. At various times during his long career Lotto was active in the Marches, and throughout his life he moved from one city to another; especially noteworthy were his stays in Treviso, Rome (1508), Bergamo, and Venice. Lotto's style remains unique in sixteenthcentury Italian painting. His deeply lyrical imagery reveals a tormented spirit, sincerely religious, but also reﬂecting the crisis of contemporary Catholicism. The transition from the classic models of the Renaissance toward mannerism is apparent in his work.



Brother Gregorio Bela of Vicenza
65.117 (Plate 45)
Brother Gregorio Belo of Vicenza, whose name is inscribed on the stone at the lower right, is represented holding in his left hand a small book, whose binding shows on the back a title, "Homelie d greg," that is, the preaching of Gregory the Great. With his right hand he is beating his breast. The wild landscape, with a representation of the Crucifixion on the summit of a distant hill, and the gesture of the right hand allude to Saint Jerome, who went out into the wilderness to do penance and study the scriptures. In fact, Fra Gregorio Belo belonged to the community of the Hieronymites, the poor hermits of Saint Jerome, a congregation founded by the Blessed Pietro de' Gambacorti of Pisa, which had as its seat in Venice the church and monastery of San Sebastiano. The commission for the portrait, which was to include a small Crucifixion, the Madonna, Saint John, and the Magdalen, is quoted in Lotto's account book on December 9, 1546, and the final payment was made on October 11, 1547. Our painting corresponds in every detail, including the date 1547, with the picture mentioned in Lotto's Libro di Span. Brother Gregorio wears the habit of his order, a brown robe and a black girdle. In this picture, which is among the most characteristic portraits of L0tto's mature style, the religious fervor of the monk is subtly indicated, and emphasized by the somber palette. The small Crucifixion in the background should be compared with the tiny picture formerly belonging to the collection of Prince Borromeo in Milan, and now in the Berenson collection in Florence. Inscribed and dated (lower right): F. Gregorii belo dc Vicentia / eremite in hieronimi Ordinis beati / frattis Petri de pisis Anno / eius. LV. M.D.XLVIII ("Fra Gregorio Belo of Vicenza hermit in Hieronymite Order of Blessed Fra Pietro of Pisa, at the age of 55, 1547"). Inscribed (lower left), two inventory numbers: 353 (in red), 101 (in white).
Oil on canvas. H. 34 3/8, W. 28 in. (87.3 X 71.1 cm.).



Maggiotto (?)
Real name Domenico Fedeli. Born 1713; died 1794. Maggiotto was a pupil of Piazzetta and during the eaxlier part of his life imitated his master's style but with less intensity and power. Although he painted altarpieces, he was at his best in genre and narrative scenes. Many of his pictures of this type are still attributed to Piazzetta. Gradually his mastefs inﬂuence on him lessened, and his late style was colder and more formal



Joseph Sold by His Brethren
29.70 (Plate 46)
Though this picture is surely by some artist working in the immediate following of Pizzzetta, the treatment of forms and the composition preclude an attribution to him. A figure similar to that of Joscph appears in a signed drawing by Giulia Lama (collection of T. Fitzroy Fenwick, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire), but our painting, as a whole, is more in the style of Maggiotto than of Lama, even though an ascription to Maggiotto is not quite convincing. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Piazzetta.
Oil on canvas. H. 43 3/4, w. 67 in. (111.1 X 170.1 cm.).



Master of Helsinus
Active in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. A number of paintings were identified as the work of one unknown artist by Roberto Longhi in 1946 (Viatico per cinque secoli di pittura veneziana, p. 48). The name given to this anonymous painter was taken from the most important of these pictures, an altarpiece in the National Gallery, London (no. 4250), in which two scenes from the life of the English abbot Helsinus are represented. The earliest paintings in the group show the inﬂuence of certain late fourteenth-century Venetian painters, especially Lorenzo Veneziano and Jacobello di Bonomo; gradually, however, the Master of Helsinus developed a more simplified, individual style which has certain characteristics in common with the schools of the Romagna and the Marches. It should he noted that one of his earliest works, a polyptych, is in the gallery in Ferrno, and there are also some fragmentary frescoes in the church of the Servi in  More recently, a number of paintings by this master have been discovered along the Dalmatian coast of the Adriatic. It has been suggested that he was born in Dalmatia, possibly in Zara (Zadar), and he has been tentatively identified with two dilferent painters, Lovro Mithetic and Meneghella de Canali (see G. Gamulin, Madonna and Child in Old Art of Croatia, 1971, pp. 132 f.).



The Madonna and Child with Saint James the Less and Saint Lucy
32.100.87 (Plate 47)
The bright colors and stylized forms are typical of the late work of the Master of Helsinus, in which reminiscences of late fourteenth-century Venetian painting are modified by a suggestion of Gothic feeling. Another very similar work by the Master of Helsinus is the diptych representing Saint Anthony Abbot and the Man of Sorrows formerly in the Chillingworth collection (sale, Fischer-Muller, Lucerne, Sept. 5, 1922, no. 95, ill., as Italian Master about 1400). Both out panel and the diptych should probably be dated about 1410; they are surely later than the altarpiece in the National Gallery, London, the Madonna in the church of the Holy Rood in Sebenico (Sibenik), and another Madonna Enthroned with Angels formerly in the art market in Rome. Formerly attributed by the Museum to an unknown Venetian painter of the last quarter of the XIV century (Cat., 1940).
Tempera on wood, gold ground. H. 12 1/4, w. 17 1/4 in. (31.1 x 43.8 cm.).



Giustino Menescardi
Giustino Menescardi; also spelled Manescardi. Knowm activity 1748-1776. Menescardi came from Milan and settled in Venice, where he developed a style closely dependent on the early work of Tiepolo. He executed decorations in the Scuola del Carmine from designs by Gaetano Zompini, and painted with Tiepolo, Maggiotto, and Guarana for the Cancellexia of the Scuola della Carità.



Esther before Ahasuerus
94.4.364 (Plats 48)
Esther is shown fainting before King Ahasuerus after approaching him with her petition at the command of Mordecai, who sits at the left of the throne. Haman, seated at the king's right, raises his hand in disapproval of Esther's effrontery. This painting is closely related to a large picture of the same subject by Gaetano Zompini, executed in 1748-1749 in the Stanza degli Archivi in the Scuola del Carmine in Venice. Since Menescardi was working at the same time in the same room, it is very likely that this painting is a sketch that he provided for the wall painting that had been originally commissioned from him but was later given to Zompini. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Giovanni Battista Tiepolo and later to Sebastiano Ricci.
Oil on canvas. H. 18, w. 51 in. (45.7 X 12.9.5 cm.).



Francesco Montemezzano
Francesco Montemezzano. Born about 1540; died after 1602. Little is known about Montemezzano except that he was born in Verona. The lack of subtlety in his color and his way of handling paint betray his provincial origin and suggest that he began his training in his native town in the workshop of an artist who painted in the early sixteenthcentury style. Authenticated works by Montemezzano, most of them done for Venice, and for several localities near Verona, show that he became a faithful imitatot of Veronese, with whom he must have collaborated for a rather long time.



Portrait of a Woman
29.100.104 (Plate 49)
This picture is close in style to Veronese's late work, and was once called a portrait of his wife. It follows his portraits in composition but lacks his breadth and refinement. The painting of the ﬂesh and the treatment of the costume, however, are characteristic of Montemezzano's best work. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Paolo Veronese (Cat., 1940).
Oil on canvas. H. 46 3/4, W. 39 in. (118.7 X 99 cm.) (including added strip of 5 1/2 in. at top).



Niccolò di Pietro
Known activity 1394-1427 or 1430. At one time wrongly identified with the Paduan painter Niccolò Semitecolo. Niccolo sometimes signed his works "Nicolaus Paradixi," because he lived neat the Bridge of Paradise in Venice. He was slightly inﬂuenced by the Venetian painters of the late fourteenth century, and he became one of the leading figures working in the Gothic style that ﬂourished in and around Venice during the first three decades of the fifteenth century. In addition to the Italian inﬂuence, his early works show a connection with the contemporary schools of central and northern Europe, oftcn recalling the styles of painters of Bohemia and the Rhenish region. Later he was inﬂuenced by Gentile da Fabriano, who was active in Venice from 1408 to 1409, and by the artists of the Emilian region.



Saint Ursula and her Maidens
23.64 (Plate 50)
This panel, which should be dated in the first years of the fifteenth century, is one of Niccolò's finest achievements. The gay, brilliant colors and the sumpmous decorative patterns are strictly confined in fiat areas, outlined by the continuous curves of the design. The delicate fused modeling of the heads against the scarlet background does not detract from the pronounced effect of a two-dimensional space, emphasized by the grass which resembles milleﬂeur tapestry. Inscribed (on background): SANTA URSULA; (on belt): [AVE] MARIA GRATIA PL[ENA]. Formerly attributed by the Museum to an unknown Venetian painter of the early XV century (Cat., 1940).
Tempera and gold on wood; embossed crowns and ornaments. H. 37, w. 31 in. (93.9 X 78.7 cm.).



Jacopo Palma the Younger
Jacopo Palma, called Palma Giovane. Born 1544; died 1628. Jacopo Palma was the son of the paints: Antonio Palrna and the great-nephew of the more famous painter Jacopo Palma, called Palma Vecchio. Palma Giovane was both a painter and an engraver. He was at one time in the service of Duke Guidobaldo of Urbino, and he visited Rome in 1568. He was a prolific artist who worked mostly in Venice, where his canvases still decorate many churches and some of the main rooms of the Ducal Palace. His renown, extending beyond the borders of the Venetian state, brought him commissions from many patrons of central Europe, among them the Emperor Rudolph II. The work of Palma Giovane, often overlooked or dismissed as secondary, shows that he was one of the best artists working in the Venetian mannerist style. He was much indebted to Jacopo Tintoretto, but his compositions and his types show that he also studied paintings by Francesco Salviati, the sculptures of Alessandro Vittoria, and the work of a number of other artists of the schools of Rome and Florence. Palma's sense of space and his pictorial treatment of forms were fundamental in the later development of Venetian baroque painting.



The Crurifixion
57.170 (Plate 52)
The size and vertical format clearly indicate that this Crucifixion was executed as an altarpiece for a church or chapel, and the figure of the Roman centurion who gallops away pointing toward Christ, the fainting Virgin, and the stormy sky allude to the moment of His death. Near the lower right corner is a sepulchral stone slab, and a half-length male nude whose hands are joined and who turns toward the cross. This figure must be Adam who, according to medieval legend, was resurrected by means of the blood of the Redeemer. From the twelfth to the fourteenth century this theme had enjoyed a certain popularity; it was revived during the Counter Reformation, especially in Venice, possibly under the inﬂuence of some medieval Byzantine prototype, and it appears in such works of Jacopo Palma the Younger as the large Crucifixion in the Pinacoteca in Bologna (inv. no. 161). In style and technique our painting is a good example of Palma Giovane's mature period. Martnerist motifs such as the mounted centurion, derived from Tintoretto and artists of the Roman school, are realized with a palette reminisoent of Titian's late works. Signed (on marble slab near lower right): JACOBUS PALMA. F.
Oil on canvas. H. 85, w. 53 1/4 in. (215.9 X 135.3 cm.).



The Ecstasy of Saint Francis
62.257 (Plate 53)
The large size and rectangular shape of the canvas, as well as the foreshortening and broad brushwork, suggest that this painting was intended to be seen from far below and was almost certainly part of the ceiling of a church. The style shows a strong link with the work of Tintoretto, particularly his compositions for the ceilings of the upper ﬂoor of the Scuola cli San Rocco in Venice. The pictorial treatment, however, and the broad handling of forms, indicate that it was painted by Palma Giovane, assisted by members of his workshop. The date would seem to fall in the artist's early period, possibly around 1570. There is evidence that the canvas has been cut along the upper edge. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Jacopo Tintoretto.
Oil on canvas. H. 73, w. 108 1/2
(185.4 X 275.6 cm.).



Paolo Veneziano
Also called Paolo da Venezia. Active by 1333; died between 1358 and 1362. There are a number of signed and dated works by Paolo Veneziano. In his late years he had many assistants, including his sons Luca and Giovanni, and it is difficult to determine which pictures are by the master himself, and which were painted by members of his workshop. Paolo's style was based on the late Byzantine tradition; he seems to have had some knowledge of contemporary Riminese painting, and his more advanced works indicate that he was profoundly affected by Gothic art. He can be considered the founder of the Venetian school and his inﬂuence was deeply felt throughout the fourteenth century, especially by Lorenzo Veneziano. 




The Madonna and Child Enthroned
1971.115.5 (Plate 51)
The Madonna, seated on a marble throne, holds the standing Child on her left knee; perched on her right hand is a green parrot, a medieval symbol of the virgin birth of Christ. This painting is characteristic of Paolo's late phase, in which Byzantine forms are subdued to a certain Gothic linear rhythm, and it should be dated 1350 or somewhat later. The panel was apparently the center of an altarpiece, but it would be difficult to reconstruct the entire work, owing to the fact that many other panels from dismembered polyptychs have survived, panels of the same shape, with identical tooling of the gold ground. Two panels representing Saint John the Baptist and Saint Mary Magdalen in the Yale University Museum, New Haven (nos. 1959.15.4 a and b), may have belonged to the left side of the same polyptych which included out Madonna. They are of the right size and date, and their earlier provenance from Austria, whence they came to New York through the firm of Silbermm and Co., may be an indication that they came from the same complex.
Tempera on wood; gold ground. Overall, h. 32 1/4, W. 19 3/4 in. (82 x 50.2 cm.); painted surface, h. 31 1/2, w. 18 3/4 in. (80 x 47.6 cm.).



Piazzetta
Giovanni Battista Piazzetta. Born 1683; died 1754. Piazzetta, the son of a woodcarver, spent his early years in his father's workshop, but at the same time he trained in painting in the following of such Venetian artists as Antonio Molinari and Antonio Zanchi. Around 1703 Piazzetta became the pupil of the Bolognese painter Giuseppe Maria Crespi, and he returned to Venice around 1710. There are many documented or signed works by him, as well as a large number of drawings, some of which were made by Piazzetta to be etched by his friend Marco Pitteri. Piazzetta's style strongly reﬂects that of Guercino, whose works he had seen during his stay in Bologna. His treatment of light and shadow recalls that of his teacher Crespi. After his return to Venice the paintings of Johann Lys and the mature works of Bernardo Strozzi made an impression on him. Some of Piazzetta's works, such as the Glory of Saint Dominic in the church of SS. Giovanni e Paolo in Venice, have been wrongly attributed to Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, who exerted an inﬂuence on Piazzetta and was also in turn inﬂuenced by him. 




Saint Christopher Carrying the Infant Christ
67.187.90 (Plate 54)
This painting shows the half-length figure of Saint Christopher carrying on his left shoulder the Infant Christ; the saint, leaning on a staff, is understood to be crossing a river. The style is that of Piazzetta, at a date around 1730. The head of the saint appears again, with more or less substantial changes, in a number of small paintings, representing various saints, either by Piazzetta or his immediate followers.
Oil on canvas. H. 28 1/4, W. 22 1/8 in. (71.7 x 56.1 cm.).



Carlo Saraceni
Carlo Saraceni; also called Carlo Veneziano. Born 1579 (?); died 1620. After receiving his early training in Venice, where he was born, Saraceni traveled to Rome in 1598, and he remained there until 1619, the year before his death. The large Annunciation in the parish church of the village of Santa Giustina, near Feltre in the Veneto, which is signed by Saraceni and dated 1621, was probably begun by him and finished by his close follower and assistant, the French painter Jean Le Clerc, who also completed a colossal canvas for the Ducal palace in Venice. There are only a few signed works by Saraceni, but many more are given to him in contemporary sources, and these include large altarpieces, as Well as highly finished works executed in oil on copper. Saraceni's style reveals the early inﬂuence of the sixteenth-century schools of Venice and Brescia, especially the work of the Bassanos, Palma Giovane, Romanino and Savoldo. In Rome Saraceni was at first impressed by the work of Giuseppe Cesari and other local representatives of late Mannerism. Later he became a close follower of the German painter Adam Elsheimer, combining his inﬂuence with that of Caravaggio and some of his early followers. His work is related to that of certain Italian Caravaggesque painters, such as Orazio Gentileschi, as well as to the style of the Netherlanclish artists of the generation before Rembrandt, such as Jan and Jacob Pynas and Peter Lastman.



Paradise
1971.93 (Plate 55)
In this small painting of Paradise the community of the blessed and the choirs of angels gather around the Trinity. The Father and Son guard the globe of the universe, which is in tum supported by a cherub and an eagle, symbols of the Evangelists Matthew and John. The lion and the bull, alluding to Saints Mark and Luke, ﬂank the two main figures, and on either side kneel the Virgin and John the Baptist. In the foreground and middle distance are the saints and prophets, and it is noteworthy that the female saints, at the left centex, are strictly divided from the male ones. In the center of the picture are Cecilia, playing an organ, and Paul, holding a sword and speaking to Peter, the old bearded man who stands behind him. To the right are Moses, pointing to the tablets of the Ten Commandments, and Lawrence, who is seen from the back, holding the handle of the gridiron. The four Doctors of the Church occupy the left foreground, and it seems likely that the one at the extreme left is a portrait of the man who commissioned the picture. The figure in the center with the banner is George, and to the right is Christopher, wearing a short cloak and carrying a wooden staff. Though the typology and execution are typical of Saraceni, the picture does not show the inﬂuence of Elsheimer, or of Caravaggio and his followers, and it was probably painted shortly after the artist arrived in Rome in 1598. The composition is based on that of a large altarpiece by Francesco Bassano, which was installed in its present location in the church of the Gesit in Rome during the pontificate of Clement VIII (1592.-1605). The arrangement of the main group and of the symbols of the evangelists, and the treatment of the halflength figure of Moses are further evidence of the inﬂuence of Bassano's painting, while the arrangement of the foreground, particularly the disposition of the saints to the left and right, suggests the inﬂuence of late Mannerist prototypes. The Saint Christopher should be compared with a much later painting by Saraceni representing Saint Roch, which is now in the Museum in Naples (no. 857).
Oil on copper. Over-all, h. 21 3/8, w. 18 7/8 in. (54.3 x 48 cm.); painted surface, h. 20 7/8, w. 18 3/8 in. (53 x 46.6 cm.).



Andrea Schiavone
Real name Andrea Medulich, or Meldolla. Born 1512. (?); died 1563. Meldolla was nicknamed Schiavone (the Slavonian) because he was of Slav descent and was born in the town of Zadar (Zata) in Dalmatia. He was mainly active in Venice, where his presence is documented from about 1541-1542. The reconstruction of Schiavone's oeuvre is based on three circular pictures in the Libreria in Venice, executed between 1556 and 1560; other pictures ascribed to him in contemporary sources do not seem to fit his accepted artistic personality. Schiavone was also an engraver, and his output in this field is fundamental to the definition of his career, and to his production as a painter. His style combines elements from Titian and from early Italian mannerists. Both his paintings and his engravings show the inﬂuence of Parmigianino, whose pupil or assistant he may have been, but his technique and his treatment of form are based upon the works of Titian from the late 1520's and the 1530's. 



The Marriage of Cupid and Psyche
1973.116 (Plates 56, 57)
The subject of this picture is taken from the Golden Ass (books iv-vi) by the late antique writer Apuleius, a novel which was extremely popular in cultivated circles in the Italian Renaissance. It represents the marriage of Cupid, the God of Love, with Psyche, in the presence of many gods of Olympus. From their attributes or their positions they should be identified as follows (left to right): Juno, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and, behind the figure of Psyche, Hebe, an unidentified river god, and an elderly female figure, possibly Vesta. The traditional attribution to Schiavone has never been questioned, but the dating remains doubtful, owing to our present lack of knowledge about the artist's development. This panel would seem to have been executed before the works in the Libreria, that is during the late 1540's or the early 1550's. The original octagonal shape of the picture suggests that it was part of a ceiling decoration, the corners having been added in the eighteenth century. There is good reason to believe that the ceiling should be identified with one mentioned by Carlo Ridolfi in 1648. Ridolfi describes Schiavone's work in the Castello of San Salvatore di Collalto, commissioned by the counts of Collalto: one of the smaller of the five ceilings represented the story of Psyche and had as a central compartment the Marriage of Cupid and Psyche. Though the other pictorial elements from this ensemble are missing, the identification seems almost certain. The story of Psyche was a favorite subject for ceiling decorations in the sixteenth century. One major example is the Sala di Psiche in the Palazzo del Te in Mantua, which was executed by Giulio Romano and his pupils about 1528. Eight compartments of the ceiling are octagonal like our painting, while the central one, which is square, shows the marriage of Cupid and Psyche. Schiavone may have seen Giulio's work and imitated certain details, such as the woman carrying a tray with ﬂowers in the scene showing Psyche worshipped as a goddess. The artist chose a related theme, but a different composition, for an unusually large drawing in the Metropolitan Museum (65.93; J. Bean and F. Stampﬂe, Drawing: from New Yark Collection, 1, The Italian Renaissance, 1965, p. 69, no. 116, ill.).
Oil on wood. Over-all, h. 51 1/2, w. 61 7/8 in. (130.8 x 157.2 cm.); painted surface (with added corners), h. 50 1/2, w. 61 1/2 in. (128.3 X 156,2 cm.).



Sebastiano del Piombo
Real name Sebastiano Luciani. Born about 1485; died 1547. Sebastiano was a close follower of Giorgione, whose style of painting he fully assimilated. After Giorgione's death in 1510 he went to Rome, where he became a friend of Raphael. Later, however, he was won over to the rival faction led by Michelangelo, whose heroic forms continued to dominate Sebastiano's style for the rest of his life. In 1531, in competition with Benvenuto Cellini, Pope Clement VII awarded him the lucrative office of piombo, or keeper of the leaden seals, which accounts for the name by which he was always called. Sebastiano was deeply affected by the spiritual crisis in Roman society in the second quarter of the sixteenth century, and, long before the Counter Reformation, a deep and sincere interest in sacred themes was evident in his religious pictures. His style tended toward gravity and simplicity. A number of sixteenth-century Italian artists found ideal models in his dignified portraits, and some of his innovations in the field of portraiture were adopted by foreign schools. 




Christopher Columbus
00.18.2 (Plate 58)
According to its inscription this picture represents Christopher Columbus (about 1446-1506); it is considered by some historians to be the most authentic likeness among the many extant and is known as the Talleyrand version. Other likenesses of Columbus have been based upon it. Because of the date on the picture it could not have been painted from life, and the face must have beet. copied from another portrait, possibly a. drawing, since lost. An engraving of the head after a copy apparently of the Museum's portrait of Columbus was made by De Bry in 1595. The Latin inscription, written in two hexameters, may have been composed for the painter by a poet or man of letters. The composition of the portrait is typical of Sebastiano's artistic repertory. 
Signed (at right): SEBASTIANVS/VENETVS FACIT; inscribed and dated (at top): HAEC EST EFFIGIES LIGVRIS MIRANDA COLVMBI ANTIPODVM PRIMVS / RATE QVI PENETRAVIT IN ORBEM 1519 ("This is the admirable portrait of the Ligurian Columbus, the first to enter by ship into the world of the Antipodes, 1519 ").
Oil on canvas. H. 42, w. 34 3/4 in. (106.6 X 88.3 cm.).



Lambert Sustris
Also called Zustris, Süster, and Lamberto Fiammingo. Born in Amsterdam between 1515 and 1520; active until 1568. Like many of his Flemish and Dutch contemporaries Lambert Sustris went to Italy, visiting Rome and settling in Venice, probably before 1545. He was a pupil of Titian and is known to have assisted his master, painting landscapes in the backgrounds of his pictures. Old sources mention him as a landscape painter highly appreciated by his contemporaries, and he also painted some fine portraits. In 1548 and 1550 Sustris was in Titian's retinue at the Imperial Diet in Augsburg; later he seems to have settled in Padua. His style combines Titian's classicism with the elegant mannerism of the painters of Parma and Rome, particularly Francesco Salviati. His works also show a connection with Jacopo Tintoretto, with whom he collaborated, and with such Venetian mannerists as Andrea Schiavone and Bonifazio Veronese.



Portrait of a Nobleman
49.7.14 (Plate 59)
This portrait, once unanimously attributed to Titian, shows in the general composition, as well as in the treatment of the head and hands and in the landscape, a strong link with the art of Lambert Sustris. However, there are certain features of the work that prevent accepting this attribution without reservation: though a large portion of the surface has suffered from old overcleaning, it remains dilficult to explain the lack of modeling and the awkward proportions of the forms of the body. Moreover, the execution of the accessories, the chain, the buttons, and the sword pommel, is extremely poor and mechanical. It is not unlikely that the lower part of the picture, with the exception of the hands, was altered or completely repainted by a less competent artist at a mther early date. From the parts of this painting which can he linked with Sustris, the date would seem to fall in the artist's late period, during the l560's.
Oil on canvas. H. 47 1/2, W. 36 1/2 in. (120.7 X 92.7 cm).



Giovanni Battista Tiepolo
Born 1696; died 1770. Tiepolo's style was formed under the inﬂuence of Paolo Veronese, Sebastiano Ricci, and Piazzetta, but at an early age he revealed his independent genius as a painter and decorator. His instant popularity won him many commissions, and his prolific activity in Italy, Germany, and Spain was of special significance in the development of the rococo style. In Venice he painted important decorations in the church of the Gesuati, in the Palazzo Rezzonico and the Palazzo Labia, and in the Scuola dei Carmini; he also worked in Vicenza, Udine, Milan, Betgarno, Verona, and elsewhere. His art reached its culmination in the decorations executed between the years 1751 and 1753 in the Residenz (the Prince Bishop's palace) in Würzburg, which are unsurpassed for buoyancy of color and brilliance of draughtsmanship, and astonishing in their treatment of perspective and light. After another period of work in Venice, Tiepolo left in 1762 for Spain, where he spent the remaining years of his life painting for King Charles III in the royal palaces in Madrid and Aranjuez. Tiepolo's work is the last great expression of the Venetian school. He had a number of followers, the best being his son Domenico.



The Investiture of Bishop Harold as Duke of Franconia (sketch)
71.121 (Plate 60)
This picture shows the Emperor Frederick I (Barbarossa) investing Harold of Hochheim, Bishop of Würzburg, with the Dukedom of Franconia (1168). It is closely related to a fresco of the same subject painted in 1751 and 1752 in the Kaisersaal of the Residenz in Würzburg, but there are a number of difiercnces, the most important of which is the vertical, rather than horizontal, format. These differences, however, need not mean that our painting is a version made after the fresco, and it is more than probable that it is the preparatory sketch painted shortly before the large painting. A picture in the Gardner Museum in Boston, representing the Marriage of Frederick I to Beatrice of Burgundy, also related to one of the frescoes in the Kaisersaal, may be considered the companion piece of our picture. Like outs it is vertical, and it is almost identical in size (27 3/4 X 21 1/4 in.) and comparable in quality. A painting in the National Gallery in London (no. 2100), showing the same theme as the Gardner picture, is not by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo but almost certainly by his son Domenico, and it therefore must have been painted after the fresco or after its preparatory sketch. (For Würzburg frescoes and preparatory drawings see P. Molmenti, G. B. Tiepalo, 1909, pp. 161 ff., ill.; E. Sack, Giambattista and Domenico Tiepolo, 1910, fig. 85 ; D. von Hadeln, The Drawing: of G. B. Tiepolo, II, 1928, pls. 132, 133; and A. Morassi, A Complete Catalogue of the Painting: of G. B. Tiepolo, 1962., p. 68).
Formerly entitled by the Museum the Triumph of Ferdinand III.
Oil on canvas. H. 28 1/4, W. 20 1/4 in. (71.7 X 51.4 cm.).



The Glorification of Francesco Barbaro (ceiling)
23.128 (Plate 61)
This picture was painted for the ceiling of a room in the Palazzo Barbaro in Venice and remained in its original position until 1874. For the same room Tiepolo painted four ovals on canvas, now dispersed in various collections: the Offer of Gifts to Juno Lucina, in the Necchi collection in Pavia; Timocleia and the Thracian Commander, in the National Gallery in Washington (Kress coll., K458); Tarquinius and Lucretia, in the Museum in Augsburg; and the Betrothal, in the Museum in Copenhagen. The fact that the subjects of these four paintings are apparently related to marriage is confirmation that the Barbaro represented in our picture is the illustrious Francesco (1398-1454), who wrote a treatise about marriage (De re uxoria) which he dedicated to Lorenzo de' Medici. Francesco Barbaro, besides being an eminent scholar, was famous as the defender of Brescia against Milan, served in Venice as a Procurator of Saint Mark, and was chosen Podestà by the cities of Treviso, Vicenza, and Verona. In this picture he holds the baton of a condottiere in his right hand and rests his left hand on the Brescian lion. At his right is Virtue, with a crown of laurel, and above him Fame holds an olive branch and blows a trumpet. Behind the lion is Abundance, or Fortune, with a cornucopia. Further to the right a winged putto holds Barbaro's helmet and armor, while at the left are two women. The figure with two faces, a serpent twined around her arm, and a vase represents Prudence; the other may be Wisdom, who is a frequent companion of Prudence. She holds a seated statuette that probably represents Minerva. A preparatory sketch for the painting was in the Sartorio collection in Trieste (P. Molmenti, G. B. Tiepolo, 1909, p. 214, ill.); another sketch, also related to this subject but showing a quite different composition, was in the art market in New York in 1972; (A. Morassi, A Complete Catalogue of the Paintings of G. B. Tiepalo, 1962, p. 42, fig. 332). There is an engraving after it by Domenico Tiepolo (A. de Vesme, Le Peintre-Graveur italien, 1906, pp. 426 f., no. 104). The style of this picture and the four ovals from the same room indicates a date about 1745-1750.
Oil on canvas. H. 96, w. 183 3/4 in. (253.8
X 466.8 cm.).



The Adoration of the Magi (sketch)
37.165.1 (Plate 62)
A similarity in some details has suggested to sevexal scholaxs that this painting is the preliminary sketch for the large altarpiece that Tiepolo painted in 1753 for the Benedictine abbey in Schwarzach in Franconia, now in the Alte Pinakothek in Munich (no. 1159). Only a few elements are similar, however, and the style is that of a more advanced stage in Tiepolo's development, though possibly still in the 1750's.
Oil on canvas. H. 23 2/4, w. 18 3/4 in. (6o.4 X 47.6 cm.).



Saint Thecla Praying for the Plaguestricken (sketch)
37.165.1 (Plate 63)
This is a sketch for the immense painting by Tiepolo commissioned in June, 1758, and installed above the high altar in the cathedral in Este, near Padua, on Christmas day, 1759. Saint Thecla is shown delivering the people of Este from the plague of 1630. In the background is a view of the town of Este with Monselice rising beyond. A drawing for the upper part of the painting showing the group of God the Father and angels was formerly in the collection of Prince Alexis Orloff (D. von Hadeln, The Drawing: of G. B. Tiepolo, 1928, II, pl. 100). The subject was engraved by Lorenzo Tiepolo (A. de Vesme, Le Peintre-Graveur italien, 1906, p. 441, no. 3). A copy after the picture was at one time in the collection of Felix Boix in Madrid, and later in the New York art market.
Oil on canvas. H. 32:, w. 17 5/8 in. (81.3 X 44.8 cm.).



The Apotheosis of the Spanish Monarchy (ceiling sketch)
37.165.3 (Plate 64)
This painting is the first sketch for the ceiling that Tiepolo painted in the so-called Saleta, or antechamber, in the Royal Palace in Madrid, after completing the throneroom decoration (1764); it must have been done shortly before the ceiling (1764-1766). The subject is an elaborate allegory of the Spanish monarchy, represented in the center as a female figure seated between two lions, probably symbols of the province of Leon. Below her, by a castle tower, is an old woman personifying Old Castile, and at the extreme right there is a female figure with a caduceus, probably representing Justice. In the group below the castle are Venus, Mars, and Saturn. At the bottom toward the left is Hercules, mythological protector of Spain, with a column symbolizing Gibraltar. Further left a female figure with an elephant's trunk represents Africa while two other personages beside her, with dark skin and feathered headdresses, are probably the two Americas. Above them is Neptune bearing the treasures of the sea, and at the extreme left is a personification of Europe with the attributes of a horse and a temple. The upper part of the painting shows various gods and allegorical figures, among them Fame blowing a trumpet, Jupiter with Aeolus, Victory, Bacchus, and Mercury bringing the royal crown to Spain. The final composition of the fresco shows important changes from this painting. There is a second sketch, formerly in the De Becker-Rothschild collection in New York and now in the collection of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Wrightsman, which is more like the final fresco, but not identical to it. The ceiling, it should be noted, is among those most severely criticized by A. R. Mengs and other exponents of neo-classical taste because of its elaborate allegory.
Oil on canvas. H. 32 1/8, w. 26 1/8 i.n. (81.6 X 66.4 cm.).



Neptune and the Winds (sketch)
37.165.4 (Plate 65)
This sketch has not been connected with any known painting by Tiepolo, and it may be a study for a ceiling decoration that was never executed. At the left Neptune is shown in his chariot. Below, struggling with his ship and nearly overwhelmed by the pursuing Winds, is a figure, probably Aeneas, whom Neptune saved from shipwreck by ordering the Winds to cease (Virgil, Aeneid, I, lines 124 ff.). Above, under the cornice of a circular temple, are Jupiter, a goddess, possibly Juno, and three cupids. The style is that of a very late period in Tiepolo's career.
Oil on canvas. H. 24 1/2, w. 24 1/2 in. (62.2 X 62.2 crn.).




The Triumph of Marius
65.183.1 (Plate 68)
This very large canvas represents the triumph of the Roman general Gaius Marius over the African king Jugurtha, an event that took place on January 1, 104 B.C. The Latin inscription in the cartouche at the top of the painting, which identifies the subject precisely, is taken from the work of the Roman writer Lucius Annaeus Florus (Epitome rerum romanorum, xxxvi, 17) of the second century A.D. Marius is shown riding a triumphal chariot drawn by four horses; in his right hand he holds the general's baton, in his left a palm leaf, symbolizing victory. The defeated king Jugurtha, his hands bound in chains, walks before the chariot. A young boy playing a tambourine leads a group of Romans carrying the spoils of victory: a metal vase, and, on a litter covered with an oriental carpet, dishes in precious metals, a bowl containing coins, and a marble bust of a woman crowned with diminutive walls and towers, representing one of the conquered towns. The figures to the left carry other precious art objects. Behind the chariot walk several soldiers, one of them blowing a trumpet, while on the walls in the distance is a group of onlookers from the Roman populace. Flaming torches, insignia of the Roman army, spears and standards, one including the initials of the Roman power, S.P.Q.R., are silhouetted against the sky. Other details, such as the branches of laurel and olive and the medallion attached to the spear in the center, allude to the victorious conclusion of the war. As noted by Morassi (see Refs. below, 1941), the half-length male figure at the extreme left looking out toward the spectator is surely a self-portrait of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, who, at the time of the execution of this work, was thirty-three years old. This picture and the two following are part of a cycle of ten paintings executed by Tiepolo for the salone of the Ca' Dolfin, the palace of the Dolfin family in Venice, near S. Pantaleone. The palace was the seat of Dionisio Dolfin (died 1734), Patriarch of Aquileja, one of Tiepolo's early patrons, for whom he executed various important commissions in Udine. Three of the series are now in the Metropolitan, five are in the Hermitage in Leningrad (nos. 74717475), and two are in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna (nos. 6797, 6798). The subjects are no. 1, the Triumph of Marius, here catalogued; no. z, the Triumph of a Roman General or Emperor (Hermitage, no. 747 5); no. 3, Volumnia and her Children before Coriolanus (Hermitage, no. 7472); no. 4, Mucius Scaevola before Porsenna (Hermitage, no. 7473); no. 5, Quintus Fabius Maxirnus before the Senate of Carthage (Hermitage, no. 7471); no. 6, the Dictatorship oifeted to Cincinnatus (Hermitage, no. 7474); no. 7, the Death of Lucius Junius Brutus (often called the Death of Eteocles and Polyneices, Vienna, no. 6798); no. 8, Hannibal contemplating the severed Head of Hasdrubal (Vienna, no. 6797); no. 9, the Capture of Carthage (65.183.2); no. 10, the Battle of Vercellae (no. 65.183.3). The inscriptions, where they are preserved, follow the Epitome of Florus more or less faithfully. Some are missing (see nos. 9, 10), and in others the lettering is partially effaced, making the exact identification of the subject very difiicult (see no. 2). The iconographic significance of the subjects has not been investigated and remains obscure, but it is more than likely that the choice was Dionisio Dolfin's, and that the series was intended to show outstanding examples of military valor and moral virtue drawn from the history of the ancient Romans, whom the Venetians claimed as their ancestors, and whose deeds they sought to emulate. In fact, subject matter of this kind enjoyed considerable popularity throughout the first half of the eighteenth century. The shaped stucco frames that originally surrounded the pictures still exist, and it has been possible to ascertain, in the main, their original disposition in the hall. The two most important paintings (nos. 1, 2) were at the centers of the main walls. On either side of each of them was one of the narrow uprights, all of the same size and shape, which are now divided between Vienna and Leningrad, while the remaining two were placed on the outer wall between the three windows overlooking the canal (see Refs., E. de Liphart, 1910). The Museum's square canvases (nos. 9, 10) were placed on the fourth wall on either side of the entrance door. The Triumph of Marius bears the date 1729, written in the oval medallion attached to a spear in the upper center of the composition, and the entire series is mentioned in situ by 1732. The boy with the tambourine and the other figures in the same group at the lower right show the inﬂuence of Piazzetta. Several preparatory models for canvases in this series have been identified. One, for the Mucius Scaevola, is in the Musée Magnin in Dijon; a second, for the Dictatorship oifered to Cincinnatus, was formerly in the Caspari collection in Munich, and a third one, with Fabius Maximus before the Senate of Carthage, was in the collection of Mrs. Derek Fitzgerald and later in the London art market. When Fragonard visited Venice in July of 1774 he made at least four drawings after the decorations in the Ca' Dolfin, which are now in the collection of the Norton Simon Foundation in Los Angeles. Two of them record details from the Triumph of Marius and the Capture of Carthage. The paintings are the most significant documents of Tiepolo's early period, and are among the major achievements of his entire career. 
Inscribed (on cartouche top center): COPERTUM CATENIS/IVGHVRTAM/POPVLVS ROMANVS ASPEXIT ("The Roman people behold Jugurtha covered by chains "). Dated (on oval medallion, upper center): 1729.
Oil on canvas, mounted on a rectangular stretcher. Over-all, h. 214 3/4, w. 127 3/4 in. (545.5 X 324.5 cm.).



The Capture of Carthage 
65.183.2  (Plate 66)
This canvas has traditionally been thought to represent the capture of Carthage by the Romans under the leadership of Publius Cornelius Scipio Ernilianus, an event which took place in 146 B.C., and, although the Latin inscription in the cartouche at the top has been obliterated, making a precise identification impossible, the presence of the insignia indicates that the theme was drawn from Roman history. It is, however, more probable that in this picture and the following one, the only two battle scenes in the series, Tiepolo depicted events from the life of a Roman hero of the early fifth century B.C., Gaius Marcius Coriolanus. Vicenzo da Canal, writing in 1732, shortly after the completion of the series, described the subject matter as the battles and triumphs of Coriolanus and other Roman histories, and Coriolanus is represented with Volumnia and her children in one of the paintings in the Hermitage (no. 7472). The figure on horseback at the extreme right as well as the dead soldier in the left foreground were copied by Giandomenico Tiepolo in a large mural in the church of Saints Faustino and Giovita in Brescia, representing the two saints defending the town against the army of Niccolò Piccinino. This fresco, which can be dated 1745-1755, includes other direct borrowings from the work of Gianbattista: the figure of one of the saints derives from that of Queen Zenobia in a canvas in the National Gallery, Washington (no. 1404), and three of the soldiers in the lower left corner are drawn from another picture from the Ca' Dolfin now in the Metropolitan Museum (65.183.5). A drawing in the Graphische Sammlung in the Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart (inv. no. 1469) is closely related to the two larger figures on the right of our canvas, while another drawing, in the collection of Dr. Rudolf J. Heinemann in New York, is related to the dead soldier in the foreground. The style of these two drawings, as well as of a third sheet connected with our number 65.183.3, is not characteristic of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo's early period, and they should be dated much later, possibly around the middle of the century. It is likely that they are copies made by the arfist himself after his own paintings, and that they were used by the workshop, as by Giandomenico for the fresco in Brescia. There is also a drawing by Guardi in the Museo Horne in Florence (inv. no. 5653) after the group of soldiers in the center of the picture.
Oil on canvas, mounted on a rectangular stretcher. Over-all, h. 169 1/2, w. 148 1/4 in. (430.5 X 377.2 cm.).



The Battle of Vercellae
65.183.3 (Plate 67)
The subject of this picture has been identified as the battle of Vercellae, where Gaius Marius, the Roman general, defeated the invading Cimbrian Gauls in 101 B.C. Without an inscription the identification cannot be conclusive, but it should be noted that the same hero is represented in another painting from the series (65.183.1). The group of two soldiers fighting in the lower left corner and the figure on horseback behind them were also used by Giandomenico Tiepolo in his fresco in the church of Saints Faustino and Giovita (see above, 65.183.2). A drawing in the Robert von Hirsch collection in Basel is connected with the large figure of a rider on the left; it is characteristic of Giambattista's work around 1750 (for the problems raised by this drawing see above, 65.183.2).
Oil on canvas, mounted on a rectangular stretcher. Over-all, h. 170, w. 148 in. (431.8 X 375.9 cm.).



Workshop of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo





Thirteen Allegorical Frescoes
43.85.12-24 (Plates 69-79)
These frescoes, all in the same style, were presumably painted at about the same time as part of one commission. They may be minor elements from a much larger decorative ensemble, now dispersed, of which the major sections are still unidentified. 'I'he frescoes, painted in tones of gray or brown with rosy touches in the large panels, include a circular painting (Virtue and Abundance), almost certainly, from its size, the center of a ceiling; four large upright panels (Liberal Arts); four horizontal panels (the four Continents), possibly overdoors in the same room as the ceiling; and four oval panels (four Virtues), probably, because of their different coloring, part of a different scheme in another room, as overdoors or ceiling decorations. Some idea as to the placing of the large panels is given by diiferences in the shadows cast by the bases of the pedestals, in the shadows and shape of the rectangular openings under the architraves, and, in Geometry and Grammar, in the shadows cast by the figures. These differences make it possible to group Geometry with Grammar and Metaphysics with Arithmetic as balancing pairs. In addition, Grammar and Geometry each show at one edge the tips of the capital and base of another column in front. It seems likely that these two panels ﬂanked a prominent architectural element, possibly the main doorway of the room, and that Tiepolo tried to merge the ornament with the actual architecture. Metaphysics and Arithmetic were probably on the facing wall; the bas-reliefs above the figures are not clear enough to permit identification of their subjects. It is said that these frescoes came from a villa near the Brenta River and were removed in 1914 or 1915, when buildings in this locality were threatened with destruction in the war, but this cannot be verified, nor is the suggested provenance from the Villa Valier Bembo at Mira (see Refs., M. Precerutti Garberi, 1968) sustained by any documentary evidence. The style of the paintings is very close to Giovanni Battista Tiepolo's during the 1750's, and they may have been designed by him, but the quality of the execution and certain characteristics of the forms indicate the work of pupils or assistants. The allegories of the four Continents and the four ovals, which are of inferior quality, are in the manner of Domenico Tiepolo. The architectural elements in the large panels were certainly executed by a specialist in painted perspectives. It should be noted that the surface of the overdoor representing the allegory of America has been hammered in the way customary to attach a new layer of plaster. This may indicate that the section of the room where this fresco was placed had been altered, or that the fresco itself had been redone, with a different subject or composition. 

69 - 12. Virtue and Abundance. The winged figure of Virtue, with a sun on her breast, follows the same iconography that Tiepolo used in the Glorification of Francesco Barbaro (see p. 56), except that here she carries a lance (as she does in Domenico Tiepolo's Virtue and Wisdom; see p. 66). The figure of Abundance may also he Fortune, in accordance with the Latin motto, Virtute duce, comit: Fortuna (With Virtue in command, Fortune follows). Diam. 114 in. (289.6 cm.).

70 - 13. Metaphysics. Inscribed (on base of statue): METAFISICA. H. 146, W. 57 7/8 in. (370.8 X 147 cm.).

70 - 14. Arithmetic. Inscribed (on base of statue): ARITMETICA. H. 146, w. 57 7/8 in. (370.8 X 147 cm.).

71 - 15. Geometry. Inscribed (on base of statue): GEOMETRIA. H. 146, W. 57 7/8 in. (370.8 X 147 cm.).

71 - 16. Grammar. Inscribed (on base of statue): GRAMMATICA. H. 146, w. 57 7/8 in. (370.8 >< 147 cm.).

72-17. Asia. H. 32 1/4, W. 41 3/4 in. (81.9 X 106.1 cm.).

73-18. Africa. H. 32 1/4, W. 42 3/4 in. (81.9 X 108.6 cm.).

74- 19. Europe. H. 32 1/4, W. 42 3/4 in. (81.9 X 108.6 cm.).

75 - 20. America. H. 32 1/4, W. 42 3/4 in. (81.9 X 108.6 cm.).

76 - 21. Prudence. Inscribed with Greek and Latin characters along the upper edge. Oval; h. 49 1/8, w. 36 1/4 in. (124.8 >< 92.1 cm.).

77 - 22. A Virtue, possibly Patriotism. Patriotism is usually represented as a female figure holding two crowns, one of oak leaves and the other of weeds. The crowns here are too sketchy to identify the leaves. Inscribed with Greek characters along the upper edge. Oval; h. 49 3/8, W. 36 1/4 in. (125.4 X 92.1 cm.).

78 - 23. Temperance. Inscribed with Greek characters along the upper edge. Oval; h. 55 7/8, w. 48 in. (142 X 121.9 cm.). 

79-24. Fortitude. The attribute of this figure is rather unusual, a broken obelisk or a corner of a pyramid, instead of a column. It may therefore symbolize the Glory of Princes, according to baroque iconography derived from a medal (coin?) of the emperor Hadrian. Inscribed with Greek and Latin characters along the upper edge. Oval; h. 45 5/8, w. 33 1/2 in. (115.9 X 85.1 cm.).

Giovanni Domenico Tiepolo
Giovanni Domenico Tiepolo. Born 1727; died 1804. Domenico, the son of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, imitated the style of his father and assisted him in many of his principal decorations, including those in Udine and in the Villa Valmarana in Vicenza. He accompanied him in 1751 to Wiirzburg and in 1762. to Spain. Domenico also had numerous independent commissions, including work in Dresden and Genoa and a notable series of scenes illustrating the Way of the Cross for the Oratorio di San Paolo in Venice. While his types and composidons are derived directly from those of Giovanni Battism, Domenico never achieved the clear tonality or the brilliance and exuberance of his father's work. However, Domenico's own artistic nature seems to have developed in the years after his father's death. His drawings reveal a new feeling for composition, more fantastic and witty subject matter, and a cultural background and experience outside the Venetian tradition.



The Sacrifice of Isaac
71.28 (Plate 80)
Although this painting is in some respects similar to the work of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, the execution and the range of color, as well as certain characteristic passages, reveal the hand of Domenico. It was probably painted in the late 1750's. The subject is taken from the Old Testament (Genesis, 22.9-13). Mariuz (see Refs., below) has suggested that it may be the companion piece of the Sacrifice of Iphigenia in the Schloss Museum in Weimar and, indeed, the two paintings are very close in style and pictorial treatment. However, such a conclusion seems unlikely in view of the vertical format and pagan theme of the Weimar picture. Formerly attributed by the Museum to Giovanni Battista Tiepolo.
Oil on canvas. H. 15 3/8, w. 21 in. (30 X 53.3 cm.).



Virtue and Wisdom
07.225.297 (Plate 81)
In the center of this allegorical group are winged Virtue with the sun on her breast, holding a lance, and Wisdom, holding a scepter and a burning lamp. At their right, half hidden by clouds, is the figure of Abundance or Fortune, holding a cornucopia. Below, a despairing woman, possibly representing Sin or Vice, is tormented by Cupid with a torch. There are vague figures of gods and goddesses in the background. In this painting Dornenico's style is very close to that of his father. Formerly attributed by the Museum to the workshop of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo.
Oil on canvas. H. 21, W. 15 3/4 in. (53.3 X 40 cm.).



The Glorification of the Giustiniani Family (ceiling sketch)
13.2 (Plates 82, 83)
This painting is the sketch, or modello, that won for Giandomenico Tiepolo the commission to paint the central portion of the ceiling in the Salone del Maggior Consiglio of the Ducal Palace in Genoa, the seat of the Genoese Doge, also called the Royal Palace. The fresco, described in detail in contemporary documents, is an allegorical representation of the deeds of the Genoese branch of the Giustiniani family, who patronized this major artistic enterprise, paying for the contest and for the execution of the work. The central figure, a personification of the Ligurian Republic, is seated on a throne at the head of the stairs, ﬂanked by Justice and by the famous Lanterna, the lighthouse at the entrance to the port of Genoa. At the top of the staircase are marble statues of Hercules and Minerva and just below, to the left, is the kneeling figure of Jacopo Giustiniani, dressed in armor, and accompanied by winged Victory. He presents to the Ligurian Republic the sword surrendered to him by King Alfonso of Aragon, after the defeat of the king in the naval battle of Ponza in 1435. To the right are two banners with the coats-of-arms of the Giustiniani family (a crowned eagle over a tower), and of the city of Genoa (a crowned red cross). The turbaned female figure in Greek costume near the lower left corner represents the island of Chios; to her left are the heraldic emblems of the Giustiniani family, and she stands in front of the tower of an imposing fortress, alluding to the fortifications built on the island when it was under their rule. The emblems and inscriptions on her scroll, the initials "V. I.", and the date 1562. surely refer to the rule of Vincenzo Giustiniani, who was the governor of the town on the island before it fell to the Turks. Near the upper left corner are the eighteen Giustiniani youths who were massacred by the Turks in 1566 because they refused to abandon their Christian faith, and above them are angels with the palms of martyrdom. The pediment of a church, at the left center, and the allegorical figure of Christian Faith, holding a cross and chalice, are symbols of the many churches the Giustiniani erected on Chios before its capture by the Muslims. In the upper right corner a ship full of rich merchandise is unloaded at the foot of a great rock that must stand for the Appennine mountains. Seated on this rock is the double-faced god Janus, symbol of the city of Genoa, and near him are the three female allegorical figures of justice (holding a balance and a sword), Commerce (holding a cock), and Fortitude (holding two columns). The figure with the cock could also be interpreted as Vigilance or Watchfulness. just below, Neptune offers Janus the treasures of the sea. Other minor allegorical figures scattered about the center of the ceiling include Virtue, blowing a trumpet and holding another trumpet in her left hand, and, seated on the clouds near her feet, a woman holding a mirror who may be Prudence. The figures in oriental costumes grouped along the right side allude to the commercial enterprises and military feats of the Giustiniani, in Asia Minor and in the islands of the Greek Archipelago. The Sala del Maggior Consiglio and the adjoining room, the Minor Consiglio, had been ravaged by fire on November 2, 1777, and the ﬂames had entirely destroyed the sumptuous decoration, including frescoes by Marcantonio Franceschini and Francesco Solimena. The reconstruction of the gutted palace was subsidized by several noble Genoese families, among them the Giustiniani, who, on March 26, 1782, oﬂered to commission a painting for the vaulted ceiling of the Sala del Maggior Consiglio. On August 13, 1782, a contest was proclaimed; regulations specified the subject of the painting and its size, and described the lighting of the room. Models and sketches were to be sent to Angelo Maria Niccolò Granara, chancellor of the Giustiniani family. The contest, originally scheduled to last four months, was extended until the end of May, and the arrival of ten of the fifteen sketches is recorded in the Avvisi of the Genoese Republic between December 21, 1782, and July 5, 1783.
After the close of the contest the fifteen sketches, the names of whose authors were kept secret, were exhibited for twelve days starting on August 24,1783, in the cloister of the church of Santa Maria di Castello. On September 9 in the Ducal Palace there was a meeting of the commission, including the Doge, Giovanni Battista Ayroli, four representatives of the Giustiniani family, fourteen members of the Academia Ligustica, and the painters Antonio Villi and Giovanni Battista Gnecco. In a secret vote three of the artists were chosen as finalists: Giovanni Cristoforo Unterberger and the Englishman James Durno, both of whom were residing in Rome, and Giandomenico Tiepolo. The other twelve sketches were returned, and the names of the competitors are not recorded. On August 23, 1784, Tiepolo's sketch was chosen by four membets of the Giustiniani family and by the doge. Tiepolo went to Genoa on March 3, 1785 and set to work early in April of the same year. By November 14 the huge ceiling was completed, and the public was admitted to see it. It should be noted that the description of the finished ceiling, as recorded in the Awisi of November 19, 1785, page 389, no. 47, indicates that the artist made several changes and additions from his earlier sketch. Though the fresco had been received with enthusiasm by Tiepolo's contemporaries, it was allowed to fall into decay in the early nineteenth century, and was eventually destroyed. In 1866 it was replaced by a new allegorical fresco of a quite dﬂferent sort by the Genoese painter Giuseppe Isola. The sketch for this decoration, one of Domenico's most ambitious and elaborate projects, shows that he was still dependent on his father's style more than a decade after the latter's death (see P. Molmenti, G. B. Tiepalo, 1909, pp. 327, 345, note 17). A drawing attributed to Domenico is believed to be a preliminary sketch for this painting (see Burl. Mag, CVII, 1965, Sept, p. xxiii, ill.), and six additional sheets of drawings were recently in the art market in London (sale, Christie's, London, June 15, 1965, from the collection of Earl Beauchamp). Formerly attributed by the Museum to Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. Inscribed (on log): MZ; (on bale): TMA-; (on box): -ITB‘; (on banner of trumpet): VIRTUS; (on scroll): CIVITAS CHY/VI/1562.
Oil on canvas. H. 46, w. 32 1/2 in. (116.8 X 82.5 cm.).



Tintoretto
Real name Jacopo Robusti. Born 1518; died 1594. Tintoretto, or "Little Dyer," was the son and assistant of a dyer. He entered the workshop of Titian and, although he remained there only a short time, was permanently inﬂuenced by his rnaster's treatment of color. He continued his studies independently, making drawings of casts from the antique and of sculptures by his contemporary Michelangelo. He also used wax models to experiment with perspective and effects of strong light and shadow. Through the works of Giuseppe Porta, called Salviati, and other painters possibly also from central Italy, he developed a personal style that combined mannerist and Venetian elements; it is as a mannerist that he occupies one of the most prominent positions in the history of painting. His life, one of ceaseless activity, was spent almost entirely in Venice, except for a brief stay in Mantua in 1580, when he was in the service of Duke Guglielmo Gonzaga. The speed with which he painted enabled him to carry out many commissions for churches and public buildings in Venice and to paint numerous portraits, although it was in some cases responsible for a certain lessening of quality. Some of his major works were done with the help of a large group of pupils and assistants, among them his two sons and his daughter Marietta. Tintoretto found his most constant employment in the Doge's Palace and in the Scuola di San Rocco, for which he executed between the years 1564 and 1577 the grandiose cycles of paintings on which his fame largely rests. His violent chiaroscuro, the tumultuous movement of his compositions, and his inexhaustible imagination created a style from which numerous other painters, including El Greco and the mannerist artists of northern Europe, drew deeply for their inspiration.



Doge Alvise Mocenigo Presented to the Redeemer
10.206 (Plates 84, 85)
This sketchy picture mm be considered the preparatory model for a large painting that Tintoretto carried out, with the help of assistants, for the Sala del Collegio in the Doge's Palace in Venice. The doge represented is Alvise (also called Luigi) Mocenigo, who was born in 1507 and served as dogs from 1570 until his death seven years later. He is shown kneeling before Christ, who is surrounded by angels. Saint Mark's lion, emblem of the Venetian Republic, lies near the marble steps of the loggia in which the scene takes place, and in the background can be seen the Piazzetta, with the Doge's Palace on the left and the Libreria Vecchia of Sansovino on the right. Behind the doge are Saint ]ohn the Baptist, Saint Louis of Toulouse, and two other saints, the one on the right possibly Gregory, a patron of the Mocenigo family. The final version of the same theme executed by Tintoretto for the Sala del Collegio shows a number of basic changes: on the right of the doge is the standing Saint Mark; the saints on his left are different, the last one being certainly Nicholas of Myra with his miter upheld by angels; the doge's two brothers occupy a prominent position at the extreme right behind the saints, replacing the two figures in the sketch whose heads and shoulders appear between the doge and john the Baptist. The final canvas in Venice is in a rather poor state; large areas of it have been altered by repeated overpaintings. X-rays of the Museunfs painting showed that a sketchy figure of Saint Mark had originally been placed between the symbolic lion and the doge. This detail, done in Tintoretto's most ﬂuid manner, was painted over, apparently by the artist himself. Two figures in the area of the sky to the left of the doge, possibly further ideas for the figure of Saint Mark, had also been painted over at a much later date. They have been revealed by a recent cleaning. The bearded head on the right is highly finished, while the body is barely delineated. The one on the left, which is executed broadly and with a loaded brush, recalling Jacopo Tintoretto's autograph drawings, is not unlike the figure of Saint Mark in the final canvas. The commission for a painting with such a subject is to be connected with the plague that ravaged Venice from 1575 to july 1577; in September 1576, when the epidemic was at its height, Doge Mocenigo vowed to build a church in honor of the Redeemer, Il Redentore, in the Giudecca. The date of the painting must therefore be 1577 or slightly later.
Oil on canvas. H. 38 1/4, W. 78 in. (97.2 X 198.2 crn.).



The Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes
13.75 (Plate 86)
This painting and one of Christ Washing the Disciples' Feet, now in the Art Gallery in Toronto, Canada (no. 58/51), were together in the collection of the Barons Farnham from 1839 until 1913 when the Museum's picture was sold. They are of the same size and were probably companion pieces, but it is not known for what church or institution they were made. The subject matter and the large size of the two pictures seem to indicate that they were intended to decorate a hall or refectory in a confraternity or convent. In the center of our painting Christ is seen handing Saint Andrew the loaves and fishes to be distributed to the multitude. The style points to a fairly early period in the artist's career, possibly the late 1540's. A smaller picture of the same subject is in the Contini Bonacossi collection in Florence, formerly in the Palazzo Giovanelli in Venice, and another version is in the Scuola di San Rocco, Venice.
Oil on canvas. H. 61, w. 160 1/2 in. (155 X 407.6 cm.).



The Finding of Moses
39.55 (Plate 87)
This painting is one of the few that seem to be entirely by Tintoretto, without the help of his numerous assistants, even in the details of the background. The main figures are painted with a typically manneristic sketchiness, as in the rendering of the garment folds. The mannerist technique is also obvious in the background, apparently inspired by similar passages in Titian. The chronological arrangement of Tintotetto's work is often problematical; our painting is perhaps to be placed around 1570, even though the color might suggest an earlier date.
Oil on canvas. H. 30 1/2, w. 52 3/4 in. (77.4 X 134 cm.).



Portrait of a Man
41.100.12 (Plate 88)
Painted with an extremely limited palette giving almost the effect of a monochrome and emphasizing only the features of the face and of the hands, this portrait must be considered a rather early work. The composition is closely connected with portraits painted by Titian in the 1530's; the sharp definition of the sitter's face points again to an early date when Tintoretto's portraits were not yet circumscribed by the constantly repeated formula of his more advanced style. There is a drawing copied after this portrait in the Atger Collection, Montpellier University.
Oil on canvas. H. 44 3/8, w. 35 in. (112.7 X 88.9 cm.).



Portrait of a Young Man
58.49 (Plate 89) 
This portrait, painted at the end of Tinteretto's early period, shows how much the artist was indebted to Titian. Its composition is, in fact, based upon some Titianesque prototype, though transformed through the inﬂuence of central Italian mannerisrn and realized with a very personal economy of colors. Though the identity of the sitter is unknown, it is traditionally assumed that he is a member of the Spinola family of Genoa. 
Oil on canvas. H. 54 1/2, W. 42 in. (138.4 X 106.7 cm.). 
Dated (on marble pedestal at left): M.D.L/I Inscribed (below): AETATIS. SVAE/ ANNO. [x?]xx 



Titian
Tiziano Vecelli. Born about 1488; died 1576. According to an early chronicler, Lodovico Dolce, Titian studied first under Gentile Bellini. Afterward, in the workshop of Giovanni Bellini, he must have been the fellow pupil of Giorgione, whose poetic style and free, yet subtle technique strongly affected his development. In 1511 he painted frescoes in Padua, and shortly thereafter he was engaged to work in the Sala del Gran Consiglio of the Doge's Palace in Venice. His services were constantly sought by the Venetian state and he also enjoyed the patronage of the courts of Ferrara, Mantua, and Urbino, and Worked for the Emperor Charles V and his son Philip II of Spain. With equal genius Titian painted portraits, religious subjects, and pagan myths. During his extraordinarily long career his style progressed from the pristine clarity of his early Sacred and Profane Love (Borghese Gallery, Rome) and Bacchanal (Prado, Madrid), to the swift sureness of brushwork and the deeper tonality of his profound late style. His noble breadth of form, his free use of the oil medium with delicate scumbles and glazes, and the rich and magnificent range of his color led the entire art of painting into new fields. In his own time, and without interruption since, Titian has held his place as one of the greatest of European painters.



Portrait of a Man
14.40.640 (Plate 90)
This portrait, which has long been regarded as a work by Giorgione, is very similar in conception and execution to such works of Titian as the signed portrait called Ariosto in the National Gallery in London (no. 1944), the unfinished Portrait of a Musician in the Spada Gallery in Rome (no. 194), and the Sacred and Profane Love in the Borghese Gallery. The handling and the composition indicate that it was painted about 1515. The picture may originally have been larger, showing the complete right hand, and possibly there was a marble parapet below. Formerly called by the Museum a work by Giorgione or Titian (Cat., 1940). 
Oil on canvas. H. 19 3/4, w. 17 3/4 in. (50.2 X 45.1 cm.). 




Filippo Archinto, Archishop of Milan
14.40.650 (Plate 91)
Filippo Archinto (about 1 500-1558), a noble Milanese, was active in the service of Francesco II Sforza, Duke of Milan, and later in that of Pope Paul III, who made him Governor of Rome and Archbishop of Milan, an office he was never able actually to assume, because of local opposition. Political enemies contrived to banish him, and he lived in exile, first in Venice and then in Bergamo, where he died. He is known for his support of the cause of Ignatius Loyola and the Jesuit Order and for his violent defense of the Curia's claims at the Council of Trent. An almost identical portrait in the John G. Johnson collection in the Philadelphia Museum (no. 204) shows Archinto in the same pose but partly veiled by a sheer curtain. It is generally believed that the Johnson painting is a second version by Titian and that the curtain alludes to Archinto's disgrace in his last years. It is more probable, however, from both external and internal evidence, that it is a copy after ours, and that since Archinto held this appointment de jure but was never in charge de facto the copy was modified to allude to this odd situation. Our painting can be dated from stylistic evidence around the middle of the 1550's, which is in accord with the facts of Archinto's life; between 1554 and 1556 he was sent as papal legate to Venice. The execution is not entirely by Titian, and the quality of some of the details betrays the hands of assistants.
Oil on canvas. H. 46 1/2, w. 37 in. (118.1 X 94 cm.).



Doge Andrea Gritti
32.100.85 (Plate 92)
Andrea Gritti (1455-1538) became doge in 1523. In this picture there is an obvious discrepancy in quality between the doge's face and some minor details, which are skillful enough to be by Titian's own hand, and the crude and summary treatment of his mantle and the curtain in the background, which seem to have been added later by an inferior painter of the late sixteenth century or the first half of the seventeenth. It is quite reasonable to believe that the picture was only a sketch from life made by Titian for use in portraits to be painted in his workshop. The style suggests a date in the late 1520's. Titian painted Gritti several times, for example in a votive picture of 1531, representing him kneeling before the Madonna and Child, that was destroyed in the great fire in the Doge's Palace in 1574. There is an old version of our portrait, very similar to it, in the collection of Nathan Allen in Kenosha, Wisconsin (formerly in the Madrazo collection). A very good copy (canvas, 29 1/2. X 21 5/8 in.), with the name of the sitter inscribed at the top, was in the famous Giovio collection at Como in the late sixteenth century. In 1969 it was in a private collection at Chiasso and on the back of the canvas it had an inscription relating to one of the previous owners, Bartolomeo Giovio. Of the other portraits of Gritti that have been amibuted to Titian the best is the one in the National Gallery in Washington (Kress coll, K 486; formerly in the Czernin collection, Vienna), which has a difierent composition and the style of a much later period in Titian's work. The portraits in the National Gallery in London (no. 5751) and in the Fitzwi1liam Museum in Cambridge (formerly in the Holford collection), once called Titian's work, have now been rightly related to Vincenzo Catena and to his workshop. The attribution of our painting to Titian is strengthened by the fact that it is evidently one of the paintings that the Barbarigo family bought from Titian's son, together with Titian's house and effects, after the artist's death, and by Ridolfi's mention of it in the seventeenth century as by Titian. The portrait has been cut at each side and at the bottom (for former measurements see Refs., Selvatico, 1875), thus removing the inscription recorded in 1881 by Crowe and Cavalcaselle, which may have been painted at the time that the mantle and the background were added to make the sketch into a formal portrait.
Oil on canvas. H. 40 1/4, w. 31 3/4 in. (102.2 X 80.7 cm.).



Venus and the Lute Player
36.29 (Plate 93)
The subdued tonality, atmospheric treatment of the landscape, deliberately unfinished portions, and easy, ﬂuid brushwork indicate that the Museum's Venus and the Lute Player was probably painted by Titian in the first half of the 1560's. The earliest representation of the reclining Venus is the so-called Venus of Urbino, executed in 1538 and now in the Ufizi in Florence (no. 1437). The background is entirely different; the nude, although in reverse, is very similar to this one in pose. Titian painted the reclining Venus with a musician several times. In the picture done in Augsburg in 1548 for Cardinal Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle (Prado, Madrid, no. 421) the goddess is accompanied by Cupid and an organ player. Another very similar version is also in the Prado (no. 420). A painting in the Berlin Museum (no. 1 849), apparently done in the early 1550's, shows Venus with Cupid and an organ player, who turns toward her, and another painting in the Uffizi (no. 1431) shows Venus accompanied by Cupid only. The picture most similar to ours is in the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge (no. 129), and recent cleaning has shown it to be an autograph work by Titian of the 1560's. It now seems likely that our painting, which has also been cleaned, was based on the Fitzwilliam version, that it was begun by Titian himself and left unfinished in his atelier. In some areas, such as the landscape, the degree of finish is typical of Titian's late style, but other portions, especially the curtains and the figure of Venus, remained unfinished and in some places almost sketchy. Our picture must have been finished, in the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century, by a Venetian artist inﬂuenced by both Titian and Tintoretto, and seeking to imitate Titian's late technique. The pictures of Venus with a musician are apparently related to the Neo-Platonic theme of the rivalry between sight and sound as instruments for the apprehension of beauty (see Refs., E. Wind, 1958, and A. P. de Mirimonde, 1966). It should be noted that a painting of Venus and a lute player answering the description of ours belonged to Joachim van Sandrart and was attributed by him to jacopo Tintoretto the Younger (see Refs., E. Tietze-Conrat, 1944). This picture, now lost, may have been by jacopo Palma the Younger, as jacopo Tintoretto had no son with his father's baptismal name. An old copy of our Venus and the Lute Player is in the Gemäldegalerie in Dresden (no. 177).
Oil on canvas. H. 65, w. 82 1/2 in. (165 X 209.4 cm.).



The Madonna and Child
49.7.15 (Plate 94)
This picture is one of the most significant works of Titian's early period, since it shows both his close link with Giorgione, especially in the figure of the Madonna, and the strength of his own genius, in the color and brushwork and in the landscape. His treatment of landscape initiates a trend that continues down to the seventeenth century in the landscape paintings of Nicolas Poussin, Pierfrancesco Mola, and Gaspard Dughet. Although the arrangement of the figures in this painting is apparently based on Giorgione's models, the way they are set against the asymetrical background and integrated with it by completely painterly means is entirely new in the history of Venetian painting. It was probably painted about 1510, and possibly even before, while Giorgione was still alive. The figure of the Child is damaged by old restorations. The removal of added strips during a recent cleaning restored the panel to its original dimensions. Oil on wood. Overall, h. 18, w. 22 in. (45.7 X 55.9 cm.); painted surface, h. 17, w. 21 1/2 in. (43.2 X 54.6 crn.).



Venus and Adonis
49.7.16 (Plate 95)
This picture represents the goddess Venus trying to restrain her lover, the mortal Adonis, at the moment of his departure for the hunt during which he was killed by a boar. The literary source followed is probably Ovid (Metamorphoses, book 10). The subject was painted by Titian and his assistants a number of times. Apart from shop versions, later copies, and old engravings, the main examples can be divided into two types. The earlier has a square composition with Cupid asleep at full length on the left and Adonis holding three hounds. This arrangement is seen in a painting in the Prado in Madrid (no. 422) and in one in the National Gallery in London (no. 34). The Prado version was sent by Titian to Philip II, who received it toward the end of 1554. The second type, which includes our painting, is wider than its height and shows, among other minor changes, only two hounds and Cupid half-length and awake. A version by Titian that is very close to ours is in the National Gallery, Washington (no. 680, Widener collection); another, now lost but known from an engraving, was made for the Farnese family and was in the royal collection in Naples until the early nineteenth century. Our picture and the related one in Washington belong to Titian's late period and probably were painted toward the end of the 1560's. Although some parts, especially areas in the landscape, are too weak to have been painted by Titian himself, the major part, including the three figures, can be considered his work.
Oil on canvas. H. 42, w. 52 1/2 in. (106.7 X 133.3 cm).



XVII Century Copy after Titian






Aldonso d'Este, Duke of Ferrara
27.56 (Plate 96)
Alfonso d'Este (1486-1554) is shown in this portrait with his hand resting on a cannon to indicate his pride in his munitions foundry and artillery corps. A portrait of Alfonso by Titian, admired by Michelangelo in Fezrara in 1529 (see G. Vasari, Vite, 1568, Milanesi ed., VII, 1906, p. 199), was ceded in 1533 by Alfonso to the Emperor Charles V, then the dominant power in Italy, in return for the emperor's favor and his intercession with the Pope on behalf of Alfonso's territorial claims. For a time Charles kept the portrait in Bologna; later it was taken to Spain, and it is listed in the inventories made in 1666 and 1686 of pictures in the Royal Palace in Madrid. After the seventeenth century there is no further mention of it (see L. Dolce, L'Aretino, Edelberger ed., 1871, p. 31; Crowe and Cavalcaselle, Titian, 1, 1877, p. 298; G. Gruyer, L'Art ferrarais, I, 1897, p. 138; C. Justi, Jahrb. der Preuss. Kstmslgn., xv, 1894, pp. 72 ff.). Documents indicate that Titian made a second portrait of Alfonso about 1555 at the request of his son and successor, Ercole II. This was almost identical to the first, and was based on a sketch that Titian had kept in his workshop (see G. Campori, Nuova Antologia, XXVII, 1874, p. 604). The main diﬂerence was the inclusion of the badge of the order of Saint Michael, which Louis XII had conferred upon Alfonso in Grenoble in 1502 (see Diario ferrarese dall'anno 1490 sino al 1502, in Muratori, Rerum italicarum scriptores, XXIV, part CII, pp. 287, 289). In order to have the decoration represented accurately, Ercole had his father's collar of Saint Michael sent to Titian. An old copy of this second version is in the Pitti Gallery in Florence (no. 311); in it the duke, wearing the collar of Saint Michael, is resting his hand on a cannon, but the composition and the dress are slightly different from our portrait, and his hair and beard are shown turned grey. A painting in the Royal Museum in Copenhagen (no. 843) representing the duke's head and shoulders is also an old copy, but it is obvious that it was taken from the first version; it shows not the order of Saint Michael but the same jewel he wears in ours (see M. Krohn, Italienske Billeder in Danmark, 1910, pp. 119 PL, 231, fig. 54). A version that belonged to a Milanese dealer and was exhibited in Ferrara in 1933 (probably the one now in the Fine Arts Gallery, San Diego, no. 50.114), shows Alfonso in different dress, without the jewel or the finger ring. The Museum's picture certainly follows Titian's first portrait and is probably a faithful reproduction of it. Although its quality is high, the brushwork and handling are not Titian's. Moreover, the pigment looks more recent than the first half of the sixteenth century, and a comparison with Titian's authentic works suggests some non-Italian early baroque painter. The problem of authorship must be left open, but it should be noted that, even though a copy, the picture shows in the rendering of forms and particularly in the details of the head, a close link with the early style of Peter Paul Rubens. It is worth recalling that Rubens, during his early stay in Spain, copied many pictures by Titian then in the royal collections in Madrid, among them the portrait of Alfonso d'Este, for such a copy is listed in the inventory of his estate (no. 58). Formerly attributed by the Museum to Titian (Cat, 1940).
Oil on canvas. H. 50, w. 38 3/4 in. (127 X 98.4 cm.).



Veronese
Real name Paolo Caliari. Born 1528 (?); died 1588. Paolo Caliari, originally fiom Verona, is no doubt the " Paulus" who in 1541 is mentioned as a pupil and assistant of the Veronese painter Antonio Badile (1518-1560). He was inﬂuenced by Badile, as well as by Titian, Parmigianino, and Giulio Romano. It seems likely that Veronese visited Rome. By 1554 he was established as one of the leading painters of Venice, where he decorated many of the halls of the Doge's Palace with scenes and allegories glorifying the Venetian state, and painted portraits of the dignitaries of his day. In the altatpieces and decorations that he made for many Venetian churches he treated religious subjects in terms of the colorful, luxurious life of his own time with such a free use of genre that in 1573 he was called before the Inquisition on a charge of irreverence. The classical grandeur of his compositions is often enhanced by architectural settings that strongly resemble the buildings of his contemporary, the architect Andrea Palladio. Veronese is one of the main representatives of the high Renaissance; his treatment of textures is brilliant and the richness of his palette is the high point in the use of color in the Venetian school. His style was imitated by his brother Benedetto and his sons Carlo and Gabriele, who carried on the work in his studio after his death. Veronese also had followers and imitators tbroughout the seventeenth century, and in the eighteenth century Giovanni Battista Tiepolo was deeply indebted to him.



Mars and Venus United by Love
10.189 (Plate 97)
The gestures of the man and woman are not satisfactorily explained by the traditional title, Mars and Venus United by Love, and the picture, which must illustrate some elaborate allegorical concept, has been variously interpreted. Robert Eisler believed that it represented the Adoption of Hercules by Juno, while Edgar Wind suggested that the woman pressing milk from her breast might symbolize Chastity Transformed by Love into Charity. The horse held back by armed Cupid would then be the emblem of Passion Restrained. Wind's explanation seems more plausible, but it leaves many points unclear, and until the specific literary source has been identified, the meaning of the painting will remain problematical. In color and style, and especially in the quality of the brushwork, this picture is a splendid and characteristic work of Veronese, and X-rays show fundamental changes in the composition that could only have been made by the artist himself as the work progressed. It should be dated in the 1570's. A number of copies of the painting are known, the best being that in the Hermitage in Leningrad,‘ and there is also a drawing after it by Jacob Jordaens, made in Antwerp in 1654. The Museum's painting can be traced with certainty in the catalogues of the Orléans collection, and before that in the inventories of works of art belonging to Queen Christina of Sweden. The nucleus of her collection was the group of paintings mken from the Imperial gallery in Prague in 1648, when Swedish forces sacked the city, and this picture, which probably belonged to Rudolf II, may even have been commissioned by him. It has, however, been wrongly identified with a painting recorded by Borghini (Il Riposo, 1584, p. 563) as commissioned by him, as well as with a Mars and Venus that Carlo Ridolfi, the seventeenth-century Venetian art historian, mentioned as belonging to his collection (Delle Meraviglie dell'Arte, 1648, I, p. 320). The Mars and Venus mentioned by Ridolfi was later described in detail in one of Queen Christina's inventories, and was last heard of in 1800, when it was exhibited in London prior to the second sale of the Orléans collection. It is known through two fragments and a copy in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. Three other large paintings by Veronese were owned by Rudolf II, Queen Christina, and the dukes of Orléans: the Allegory of Wisdom and Strength and the Allegory of Virtue and Vice in the Frick Collection, New York (nos. 12.1.128, 12.1.129), and the Hermes, Herse and Aglauros in the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge (no. 143). Though the pictures are similar in size and all have complicated allegories for subject matter, there is as yet no conclusive evidence that they originally constituted a series.
Signed (on marble fragment at bottom): PAVLVS VERONENSIS.F.
Oil on canvas. H. 81, W. 63 3/8 in. (205.7 X 161 cm).



Boy with a Greyhound
29.100.105 (Plate 98)
According to the Martinengo family of Brescia, who once owned this picture, the boy portrayed is a member of the Colleoni family. The Colleoni and Martinengo families were connected by marriage. A bust portrait of this boy in the same attitude is now in the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu (formerly in the collection of Baron von Hadeln in Venice). The Museum's portrait, which has been somewhat altered by old repainting, seems to be by Veronese with the help of one or more assistants, and dates perhaps from the 1570's. It is possible that the picture was originally one of a number of portraits, similar to the series at the Villa Barbara (now Volpi) at Maser. In this case it would have been the right section of a decorative unit, and would have been balanced at the fat left by a painting with a figure turned toward the right.
Oil on canvas. H. 68 3/8, w. 40 1/8 in. (173.6 >< 101.9 cm.).



Alessandro Vittoria
46.31 (Plate 99)
Alessandro Vittoria, the famous sculptor, was born in Trent in 1524 or 1525 and was active mostly in Venice, where he died in 1608. He was one of the main representatives of the Venetian classical style of the late sixteenth century and collaborated with Veronese in the decoration of the Villa Barbaro at Maser (about 1560-1562). The subject of our portrait shows a strong resemblance to two busts of Vittoria at a more advanced age, one on his tomb in the church of San Zaccaria in Venice, and another in the Berlin Museum. The marble statuette held by the sculptor offers a further proof of the identification, for it is identical, except for a slight difference in the position of the head, with a small bronze of Saint Sebastian signed by Vittoria, and now in the Metropolitan Museum (no. 40.24; a later and somewhat modified version is now in the Los Angeles County Museum). The pose of the statue, which recalls one of Michelangelo's Dying Slaves in the Louvre, is similar to that of the marble Saint Sebastian executed between 1561 and 1563 for an altar in the church of San Francesco della Vigna. Vittoria noted in his diary that he had a bronze statuette of Saint Sebastian cast in 1566 while another bronze of the same subject was made by him in 1575. The Museum's bronze is presumably the one of 1566 and the close relationship between it and the marble in this painting suggests that the marble must have been made about the same time. The age of the sitter, who would have been forty-one or forty-two, and the style also indicate a date for the painting of about 1566. There is a sixteenth-century copy of this portrait in the Museo Civico in Vicenza (no. 68). A halflength portrait of a man holding a statuette, painted by Palma Giovane and now in the Gemäldegalerie in Vienna, which may be a portrait of Vittoria at the end of his life, is perhaps identical with the one mentioned by Carlo Ridolfi (Delle Maravlglie dell'Arte, 1648, II, p. 192).
Oil on canvas. H. 43 1/2, w. 32 1/4 in. (110.5 X 81.9 cm.).



Antonio Vivarini
Also called Antonio da Murano. Active by 1441; died between 1476 and 1484. Antonio Vivarini was the elder brother of Bartolomeo Vivarini and the father of Alvise Vivarini. In the earlier part of his came: he and his brother-in-law, Giovanni d'Alemagna, worked together and painted for Venetian churches a number of altarpieces set in elaborate architectural frames of Gothic type. Antonio's style is diﬂicult to sepaxate from that of Giovanni and, although it is generally supposed that Giovanni was the lesser member of the partnership, perhaps even an assistant, the extent of his collaboration is not definitely known. The signatures of both artists appear on many of these altarpieces, but at least one of their joint works from the early period, a painting in Parenzo, is signed by Antonio alone. After Giovanni d'Alemagna's death (about 1450) Antonio was assisted by his brother Bartolomeo, who seems to have worked on the altarpiece in the Vatican Gallery, though it bears only Antonio's signature and the date 1464. Antonio's style, which evolved very little during his long career, shows the inﬂuence of Gentile da Fabriano, Pisanello, and possibly Giovanni d'Alemagna. Beginning in 1447 Antonio worked for several years in Padua, and he was apparently impressed by the markedly individual style of Francesco Squarcione and his pupils. Antonio belonged to a transitional phase of fifteenth-century Italian art and, although his work remained fundamentally Gothic, he employed some of the new themes and motifs of the Renaissance. 




Saint Peter Martyr Healing the Leg of a Young Man
37.163.4 (Plate 100)
This small panel shows Saint Peter Martyr of Verona miraculously healing a young man who, remorseful for having kicked his mother, had chopped off his leg (see Acta Sanctorum, April, part III (1866), pp. 700, 702 f.). There are six other panels showing episodes from the life of the saint, but the series must be incomplete, since the existing panels do not include a represenmtion of his death. The size and shape of the panels suggest that they were not part of a predella but were placed in two rows on each side of a full-length figure of Saint Peter, either painted or sculptured (for similar arrangements in Venetian altarpieces, see Simone de Cusighe's polyptyeh in the Accademia in Venice and Quirizio da Murano's Saint Lucy in Rovigo). The other panels are: Peter Martyr Received into the Dominican Order, and Peter Martyr and the Miraculous Fire (Berlin Museum, nos. 65 and 66); Peter Martyr Exorcizing a Woman Possessed by the Devil (George F. Harding collection, Chicago, formerly Paolini, Rome); Peter Martyr Exorcizing the Devil Disguised as the Madonna and Child (formerly Claude Lafontaine collection; sale, Palais Galliera, Paris, April 10, 1962, no. 7); the Virgin with Saints Catherine, Agnes, and Cecilia Appearing to Peter Martyr in a Monastery near Como (collection of Count Leonardo Vitetti, Rome); the Funeral of Peter Martyr (Mario Crespi collection, Milan). Judging from its style our panel seems to have been painted after Antonio's partnership with Giovanni d'Alemagna ended, and it should therefore be dated in the 1450's.
Tempera on wood; gilt halo. H. 20 7/8, w. 13 1/8 in. (53 X 33.3 cm.).



Workshop of Antonio Vivarini





Saint Jerome
65.181.6 (Plate 101)
The saint is represented wearing the cardinal's habit and holding a model of a church and a book of his own writings. The rays that emanate from both the door of the church and the leaves of the book are symbolic of his role as doctor of the church and interpreter of the scriptuxes. The balustrade before which the figure is placed curves in the center, forming a niche; in the lower right corner is the lion, a common attribute of Saint Jerome. In its general composition our painting derives from the main panel of a polyptych, formerly in the church of Santo Stefano in Venice, now in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna (no. 10 A), signed by Giovanni d'Alemagna and Antonio Vivarini, and dated 1441. Another panel in the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore (no. 693), signed by Giovanni d'Alemagna alone and dated 1444, is based on a similar scheme, although in it the saint is shown slightly turned to the right. Neither the Vienna nor the Baltimore paintings include the lion. The style of our work is closer to Antonio Vivarini than to his partner Giovanni d'Alemagna, and the quality suggests a workshop product rather than the hand of the master himself. The picture probably dates from the first half of the 1440's, although a very similar scheme occurs in the representations of Saint Jerome executed by Antonio Vivarini later in his career.
Tempera on wood, gold ground. Over-all (with added strips), h. 10 3/4, w. 7 1/8 in. (27.3 X 18.1 cm.); painted surface, h. 10 1/4, W. 6 5/8 in. (26 X 16.8 cm.). Inscribed (on back of panel, in a later hand): Gian Bellini/Näp. 3.



Bartolomeo Vivarini
Known activity 1450-1499. Bartolomeo Vivarini was the younger brother of Antonio Vivarini, with whom he collaborated. In his early paintings he followed strictly the style of his elder brother, but later he came under the inﬂuence of Paduan painting, especially the work of Andrea Mantegna, and, together with Carlo Crivelli, Bartolomeo Vivarini can be considered among the chief exponents of the Paduan style in Venice. He was also, to some extent, inﬂuenced by the painting of Giovanni Bellini, but, compared with Bellini's fresh and original work, Bartolomeo's always remained archaic and conservative. For the most part his way of painting did not develop greatly after about 1475, but at the end of his career his painting shows some traces of the style of his nephew Alvise Vivarini. Bartolomeo's extensive production, in which he used the elaborate type of Muranese altarpiece, is unequal in quality and shows that he had a large number of assistants working with him.



The Madonna and Child
30.95.277 (Plate 102)
This painting shows Bartolomeo's persistent conservatism, at a date when the leading artist of Venice, Giovanni Bellini, had developed a new, more modern style. The gold background and the restricted scheme of bright, jewel-like colors give the painting an archaic ﬂavor and a certain provincial quality. With various changes and adaptations the same composition of the halflength Madonna and Child reappears in a number of works by Bartolomeo or his workshop. The painting has suffered from overcleaning in the past and from being transferred, especially in the gold ground and in the ﬂesh tones.
Signed and dated (on cartellino at lower right): OPVS FACTVM . . . s . . . BARTHOLEMEV/ . . . VIVA.R[IN]VM DEMVRIANO 1472.
Tempera on wood (transferred from wood to canvas and back to wood); gold ground. H. 32 3/4, W. 25 3/4 in. (83.2 X 65.4 cm). 
 


The Death of the Virgin
50.229.1 (Plate 103)
This large altarpiece is a traditional and archaic representation of the subject. The Virgin's catafalque is surrounded by eleven apostles, as in the account of the thirteenthcentury writer Jacobus de Voragine. Her soul, represented as a small child, is received by Christ, who is seated in a rnandorla of a type frequently seen in medieval and late Gothic painting. The two deacon saints, Lawrence and Stephen, at either side, may have been included as patrons of the donors or because of a connection with the altar or the chapel for which the panel was originally painted. The style is typical of Bartolomeo's conservative and somewhat provincial late period. The hard modeling of the figures, recalling wooden or stone sculpture, and the acid, strident colors show the inﬂuence of the Paduan painters: the landscape is in the manner of Mantegna. The death of the Virgin in the lower part of our panel shows marked similarities to two other paintings of the same subject, one by Gerolamo da Treviso the elder, formerly in the Monte di Pietà in Treviso, and another by Andrea Mantegna, now in the Prado. The Redeemer in the mandorla above possibly depends upon some Venetian source such as the mosaic of the Death of the Virgin in the Mascoli chapel in San Marco in Venice, variously attributed to Mantegna, Andrea del Castagno, and Andrea da Murano. The faulty foreshortening of certain figures in our painting, and the crude expressions of some of the faces suggest that it is partly a workshop product. The date that appeared originally on the cartellino at the lower center has been obliterated by restorations, but since all the elements in the painting suggest that it was painted very late in Bartolomeo's career, it is quite likely that Moschini was correct when he read the date as 1499 (see Refs.). In that case, our painting would be the last known work of Bartolomeo Vivarini.
Signed and dated (in cartellino at lower center): illegible.
Tempera on wood; arched top. H. 74 3/4, w. 59 in. (190 X 149.9 cm.).



A Saint Reading (Saint Mark?)
65.181.1 (Plate 104)
The lack of any specific attribute makes it impossible to identify this figure. However, it has traditionally been called Saint Mark, and this identification is supported by the very close similarity of the features in our painting to those of the Saint Mark in the central panel of Bartolomeo Vivarini's triptych of 1474 in the church of the Frari in Venice. Our painting appears to have been altered along all four edges, and there is good reason to believe that originally it represented a full-length figure. The style is that of Bartolomeo Vivarini in the early 1470's. It should be noted that a full-length figure of Saint Mark, no longer traceable, is recorded in old sources as in the lowest portion of a three-tiered polyptych, formerly on the first altar to the left in the church of Santi Giovanni e Paolo in Venice. This altarpiece was dismembered around 1815, and the three panels which remain i.n the church are now arranged as a triptych, with the figure of Saint Augustine, a signed and dated work of 1473, fianked by representations of two other saints, Dominic and Lawrence. The Museum's panel may have belonged originally to the same complex: it is similar in style, and the tooled halo is identical with the halocs of Saints Lawrence and Dominic.
Tempera on wood, gold ground. Over-all (with added strips), h. 19 1/8, w. 15 1/4 in. (48.5 X 38.4 cm.); painted surface, h. 18 5/8, w. 14 3/4 in- (47.3 X 37.5 cm).





Francesco Zuccarelli
Francesco Zuccarelli. Also spelled Zuccherelli. Born 1702; died 1788. Zuccarelli received his early training in Rome; around 1730 he established himself in Venice, where he remained until about 1742, when he went to England for several years. Thereafter he divided his time between Venice and London. Zuccarelli was deeply inﬂuenced by the late seventeenth-century Roman landscape painters and by Marco Ricci. He soon became famous for his Arcadian views, simple pastoral scenes without the gods and heroes who typically animate classical landscapes, and he had many pupils working in his style, as well as a number of imitators. 



Landscape with Figures
59.189.1 (Plate 106)
This painting of the Italian countryside, with peasants engaged in their everyday activities, is a chaxacteristic example of Zuccarelli's work. The treatment of the trees is reminiscent of Marco Ricci, and the brushwotk and color, which does not yet show the pastel-like fusion of the artist's mature period, suggest a rather early date, perhaps in the late 1730's. 
Oil on canvas. H. 31 1/4, w. 47 1/2 in. (79.4 X 120.6  cm.).




Unknown Painter, Second Quarter of the XV Century






The Madonna and Child
32.100.93 (Plate 105)
This picture was evidently painted for the Cornaro family of Venice, whose coat of arms appears at the base of the panel. Its style is related to the work of Jacopo Bellini and Donate Bragadin and also to that of Antonio Vivarini, but our present knowledge of the Venetian school toward the end of the second quarter of the fifteenth century makes a definite attribution impossible. The subject is the Madonna of Humility surrounded by angels bearing the instruments of the Passion, with God the Father above. The theme of the Passion is also symbolized by the Child's pose, which recalls the attitude of the Man of Sorrows, while the veil that the Virgin's gesture emphasizes alludes to the shroud of the dead Christ. Formerly dated by the Museum in the middle of the XV century (Cat., 1940).
Tempera on wood; arched top. Over-all size, including added strips at sides and bottom and added upper comers, h. 15 3/8, w. 10 in. (39.1 X 25.4 cm.); painted surface, h. 14 1/4, w. 9 in. (36.2 X 22.8 cm.).



Unknown Painter, Late XVII Century






The Last Supper
07.150 (Plate 107)
This is a copy of the Last Supper painted by Jacopo Tintoretto for the church of San Trovaso in Venice (ill. in E. von der Bercken and A. L. Mayer, Jacopo Tintoretto, 1923, II, p. 82). The technique, the range of colors, and a certain exaggeration of Tintoretto's forms suggest that this artist worked in the late seventeenth or early eighteenth century. The painting shows some similarity to the early work of Sebastiano Ricci (1660-1734), who is known to have painted copies of the great Venetian masterpieces of the sixteenth century. Formerly called by the Museum a copy after Tintoretto (Cat, 1940).
Oil on canvas. H. 25 3/4, w. 38 in. (65.4 X 96.5 cm.).